Cluster Perturbation Theory for Hubbard models
David S´en´echal,∗ Danny Perez, and Dany Plouffe
D´epartement de physique, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec, Canada J1K 2R1
Cluster perturbation theory is a technique for calculating the spectral weight of Hubbard models of 
strongly correlated electrons, which combines exact diagonalizations on small clusters with 
strong-coupling perturbation theory at leading order. It is exact in both the strong- and 
weak-coupling limits and provides a good approximation to the spectral function at any wavevector. 
Following the paper by S´en´echal et al. (Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 522 (2000)), we provide a more 
complete description and derivation of the method. We illustrate some of its capabilities, in 
particular regarding the effect of doping, the calculation of ground state energy and double 
occupancy, the disappearance of
the Fermi surface in the t − t′ Hubbard model, and so on. The method is applicable to any model 
with on-site repulsion only.

PACS numbers: 71.27.+a,71.10.Fd,71.10.Pm,71.15.Pd


I. INTRODUCTION


It is generally agreed that correlation effects play a cen-tral role in the Physics of many classes 
of materials, in-cluding high-temperature superconductors, manganites and organic superconductors.  
Unfortunately, making definite predictions from theoretical models of strongly correlated electrons 
is notoriously difficult, because these systems are not well served by the usual approximation 
schemes of many-body quantum mechanics. But ARPES experiments, which have improved steadily in 
resolution over the past decade¹,², clearly show the need to go be-yond simple band-structure 
interpretations of the results.
It is generally taken for granted that ARPES experi-ments measure f (ω)A(k, ω), where A(k, ω) is 
the spec-tral function, the probability for an electron of wavevec-tor k to have an energy h¯ω, and 
f (ω) is the Fermi-Dirac function. At zero temperature, this boils down to the negative-frequency 
part of A(k, ω). In fact, things are more complicated: A(k, ω) is the density of final states in 
Fermi’s golden rule, and the matrix element may have a non-negligible frequency and momentum 
dependence, even though it is commonly neglected. Nevertheless, even A(k, ω) can be a challenging 
object to calculate within a correlated electron model.
In this paper, we will explain in detail a technique introduced in Ref. 3, named Cluster 
Perturbation The-ory (CPT), that can be applied to Hubbard models (i.e. models of correlated 
electrons with on-site interaction) in order to calculate the spectral function A(k, ω). The basic 
idea behind cluster perturbation theory is to di-vide the lattice into a superlattice of identical 
clusters (Fig. 1). The Hubbard model on each cluster is solved exactly (the electron Green function 
is calculated numer-ically), whereas the hopping between sites belonging to















FIG. 1: Tiling of the square lattice with 13-site clusters. The NN hoppings within a cluster are 
represented by full lines, and inter-cluster hoppings by dashed lines. Of course, much simpler 
tilings (e.g. square) are possible.


cluster is formally the quotient γ/Γ. We will use the nota-tion r and R for the lattice sites of γ 
and Γ, respectively, and L will denote the number of lattice sites within a cluster. An example of 
clustering of the two-dimensional square lattice with L = 13 is shown on Fig. 1. Tiling the lattice 
with rectangular clusters is obviously simpler, but being able to compare the results of different 
tilings is important, in order to separate real physical effects from artefacts caused by a 
particular cluster shape. Each lat-tice site r of a cluster can also host a number nₒrb > 1 of 
orbitals (as in a many-band model), although the case nₒrb = 1 will be most frequent.
The class of Hamiltonians that can be treated by this approach has the form H = H₀ + V , where

different clusters is treated perturbatively. This paper is methodological in character; even 
though results rele-vant to actual materials are presented (e.g. Fig. 6), the emphasis is placed on 
the method itself.
H₀ =
0
R
R         R,R′
a,b
R,R′ †
Va,b cRacR′ b  (1)
Let γ denote the original Bravais lattice of the model,  Here a, b label different electron 
orbitals (or sites) within
0
and Γ the superlattice of clusters, such that Γ ⊂ γ; the   a cluster, and range from 1 to nₒrbL.  H 
 is a Hub-

2


bard Hamiltonian defined on a single cluster and V is a
′
hopping term between clusters, V R,R being the hopping
amplitude between orbital a of cluster R and orbital b of cluster R′. Hopping can be of any range, 
and multi-band models are treated on the same footing as the one-band model: The indices a, b may 
refer to different lattice sites on a cluster, or to different bands (orbitals) within a clus-ter, 
or both. In order to stay as general as possible, we will call them “orbital indices”. Spin indices 
are implicit in hopping terms and suppressed where appropriate in order to lighten the notation.
In the simplest case, treated explicitly in Refs 4,5, the cluster consists of a single site (γ = Γ 
and nₒrb = 1) and the perturbation V is a nearest-neighbor hopping :
general results of SCPT can be immediately applied to the class (1) of Hamiltonians, with the 
difference that atomic Green functions are replaced with exact Green functions of a Hubbard model 
defined on a small cluster. In Sect. III, we make a series of important remarks on the method. In 
Sect. IV we explain how the Green func-tion on the cluster is calculated numerically. We com-ment 
on multi-band models in Sect. V. We conclude in Sect. VI with a calculation of integrated 
quantities, like
the energy density and double occupancy.


II. DERIVATION OF THE METHOD
0            ′                        A.  The strong-coupling expansion
Hr = Unr,†nr,↓ ,  V ʳ,ʳ = −t (r, r′ N.N.),  (2)

In that case, the perturbative treatment of V coincides with the so-called strong-coupling 
perturbation theory (SCPT) of the Hubbard model and has been extensively studied in Ref. 5. 
Additional references on the strong-coupling perturbation theory, in particular earlier at-tempts 
at its systematization, can be found therein. We review the main results in the following 
subsection. In practice, SCPT provides approximate expressions for the various electron Green 
functions in terms of the hop-ping integral and of various atomic Green functions (i.e., Green 
functions of the one-site Hubbard model). The
In this section we review the main results of Ref. 4,5 on strong-coupling perturbation theory, in a 
notation adapted to the present situation. It is assumed that we are dealing with a Hamiltonian of 
the form (1). Our goal is to place the approximation made in CPT in the con-text of a systematic 
strong-coupling perturbation theory,
i.e. to explain in what way it constitutes a leading order approximation.
In the path-integral formalism, the partition function is expressed as a functional integral over 
Grassmann vari-ables γRₐ that correspond to the creation operator cRₐ :




Z = ∫


[dγ


β
dγ] exp −  dτ
,,Σ


γ⋆ (τ ) (∂τ − µ) γRₐ(τ ) +

Σ H⁰ (γ⋆ , γRₐ) +


Σ R,R′



γ⋆ γR′ b
,,


(3)

0  ,,R,a
R
R           R,R′
a,b
a,b
,,
In order to lighten the notation, we use greek indices to denote sets such as (R, a, τ ), and use 
bra-ket notation. For instance,
∫ β  Σ  R,R′ ⋆     Σ   ⋆

dτ
0   R,R′
a,b
Va,b γRa(τ )γR′ b(τ ) =
Vµν γµγν = ⟨γ|V |γ⟩            (4)
µν
Strong-coupling perturbation theory, as formulated in Ref. 4,5, proceeds first by a so-called 
Grassmannian Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, which amounts to expressing the perturbation ⟨γ|V 
|γ⟩ as the result of a Gaussian integral
over auxiliary Grassmann fields ψRₐ(τ ), ψ⋆ (τ ):
e—⁽γ|V |γ⟩ = det V ∫ [dψ⋆dψ] exp ⟨ψ|V —¹|ψ⟩ + ⟨ψ|γ⟩ + ⟨γ|ψ⟩           (5) In terms of the auxiliary 
field, the partition function becomes, up to a normalization factor,

Z = Z₀
∫ [dψ⋆dψ]e(ψ|V −¹|ψ⟩ De(ψ|γ⟩+(γ|ψ⟩E
(6)
where   ₀ means an unperturbed average over the original electron field γ. Denoting by   ₀,c the 
cumulant averages, and owing to the block-diagonality of H⁰, the above average can be rewritten 
as⁵:
exp Σ  1  Σ ∫ β YR dτldτ ′  ψ⋆ (τ₁)..ψ⋆ (τR)ψRₐ′ (τ ′ )..ψRₐ′ (τ ′ )


R=1
(R!)2
R{al,a′} 0

l=1
l  Ra1
RaR
R  R   1  1


×DγRₐ (τ₁)..γRₐ (τR)γ⋆ ′ (τ ′ )..γ⋆

′ (τ ′ )E
3

(7)
1      R    RaR  R  Ra1  1  0,c
The partition function now takes the familiar form
∫      (      Σ     )
	  	
where the action has a free (Gaussian) part S₀[ψ⋆, ψ] = −⟨ψ|V —¹|ψ⟩ and an infinite number of 
interaction terms
SR [ψ⋆, ψ] =  −1     ′ψ  ..ψ  ψ⋆ ..ψ⋆ G⁽R⁾  .                (9)




i.e., the interaction terms are defined in terms of bare vertices given by the exact (connected) 
electron Green
functions G⁽R⁾  on a cluster (the primed sum means
µ1..µR

that all terms share the same cluster index R, which
is suppressed). These interactions can be treated by the usual diagrammatic perturbation theory, 
with the unper-turbed propagator of auxiliary fermions given by V .
In order for the Grassmannian Hubbard-Stratonovitch transformation to be of any use, a connection 
must be made between the Green functions for the auxiliary fermions and that of the original 
electrons. This is done in Ref. 5; in particular, the electron one-particle Green function  is 
related to the self-energy Ξ of the auxiliary fermions by the simple relation  —¹ = Ξ—¹  V . The 
problem is then reduced to calculating this self-energy Ξ, which can be done in perturbation theory 
using the action (9).
The simplest term of (9) corresponds to R = 1, and is quadratic in ψ : S¹ [ψ⋆, ψ] = −⟨ψ|G|ψ⟩, where 
Gₐb(τ ) is








FIG. 2: Diagrams associated with the terms of order V ⁰, V ¹ (above) and V ² (below) in the 
self-energy Ξ of auxiliary fermions, in strong-coupling perturbation theory. Here only the 
interaction terms R = 1, 2, 3 of Eq. (9) contribute. The term R = 4 (i.e., G⁽⁴⁾) would come in at 
order V ⁴.

Translation invariance along the superlattice Γ allows us to express V and G in terms of a 
wavevector Q be-

the exactly known one-electron Green function on a clus-
ter. If only this term is kept, then the auxiliary fermion self-energy is precisely Ξ = G. If 
higher interaction terms are considered (R > 1), then, as illustrated in Fig. 2,
longing to the reduced Brillouin zone (BZΓ, the Brillouin zone of the superlattice) instead of 
cluster indices. In particular, the hopping term may be expressed as

propagators of the auxiliary fermions must be inserted and, accordingly, these contributions to Ξ 
are of higher order in V .
Vab
0,R iQ·R
a,b
R

Numerically, it is highly impractical to compute any-thing but the one-electron Green function G = 
G⁽¹⁾ on a cluster. The latter can be readily obtained by the Lanc-
where a superlattice site ‘0’ has been chosen as the origin. In this representation, Eq. (10) 
becomes

zos algorithm (see Sect. IV A below). As explained in Ref. 3, this forces a restriction to the 
lowest nontrivial order in SCPT. At this order, the one-electron Green
function G is given, in operator form, by Gˆ—1 = Gˆ—1 − Vˆ.

Ga,b
(Q, ω) = 
Gˆ(ω)
1 − Vˆ(Q)Gˆ(ω)



a,b
(13)

As a function of frequency, and after restoring orbital and cluster indices, this relation may be 
expressed as
This is the starting formula of Cluster Perturbation The-
ory on homogeneous systems.


Gˆ(ω) =
Gˆ(ω)
1 − VˆGˆ(ω)

(10)

B. Lattices, superlattices and wavevectors

where Gˆ, Gˆ and Vˆ stand respectively for the matrices
The Green function  ₐ,b(Q, z) is in a mixed repre-sentation: direct space within a cluster and 
reciprocal


R,R′

R,R′
(Fourier) space between clusters. A pure Fourier repre-

Gₐb (ω)  ,  δR,R′ Gₐb(ω)  and  Va,b   (11)
sentation is preferable, in terms of wavevectors belonging

4


to the Brillouin zone BZγ of the original lattice. However, the perturbative treatment breaks 
translation invariance on γ, because it singles out hopping terms between clus-ters, while 
translation invariance over the superlattice Γ is preserved. As a result, the Green function ₐ,b(Q, 
z) will depend on two wavevectors k and k′ of the Brillouin
zone, except that k − k′ must belong to the reciprocal
This, together with Eq. (13), is the central formula of Cluster Perturbation Theory. In the 
remainder of this paper, we will drop the index ‘CPT’ on the Green func-tion or related quantities.
In pratice, we are more often interested in the spectral function

superlattice Γ∗. We will demonstrate the following (the
A(k, ω) = 2 lim
η→0+
Im G(k, ω + iη + µ)  (19)

frequency argument is suppressed here):
where µ is the chemical potential. Unless particle-hole
L  L                symmetry is present, the chemical potential is not known,

G(k, k′) =  1 Σ Σ δ(k − k′ + q )G
(k)e—ik·ra e
′
ik ·rb

L
s=1 a,b=1
s ab

(14)
since the calculation is done at fixed filling. It must be
calculated from the density of states (this will be ex-plained in Sect. VI below). For this reason, 
it is more

where (i) qs belongs both to the reciprocal superlattice
Γ∗ and to the original Brillouin zone BZγ (L possible
pratical to deal with the shifted spectral function
˜

values) and (ii) rₐ is the position of the lattice site as-sociated with the orbital index a. For 
simplicity, we will
A(k, ω) = A(k, ω  µ) =  2 lim
η→0+
Im G(k, ω + iη) (20)

assume a one-band model, so that the orbital index a is also a site index. This assumption will be 
relaxed in Sect. V below.
The demonstration of Eq. (14) is straightforward. We simply apply the basic Fourier transform
which does not involve µ in any way (Note that in the
present paper, the Hamiltonian excludes the chemical po-tential term as well).
The qs = 0 terms are not considered here, but they are a measure of the breaking of translation 
invariance
caused by the different treatment given to intercluster

cRa
 1  
= √    c(k)e         (15)
and intracluster hopping. It has been verified that the

NL k
where N is the number of sites on the superlattice (N →
∞). Applied to the Green function, this yields
spectral weight associated with those terms is nonposi-tive, and that it integrates to zero.

′  1  Σ

R,R′       ′  ′
III. GENERAL REMARKS

G(k, k ) = NL

R,R′
a,b
Gₐb e
—ik·(R+rₐ)eik ·(R +rb)

A. Limiting cases

=  1  Σ
′         ′  ′
G (Q)e     e

N 2L
ab
′
R,R ,Q
a,b
iQ·(R—R )
—ik·(R+rₐ)+ik ·(R +rb)
The CPT Green function (18) is exact both in the
strong and weak-coupling limits. This may look para-doxical at first, since it is a perturbative 
result that is

 1
L    ab
a,b Q
(Q)e
′
—ik·rₐ+ik ·rb
δ(K − Q)δ(K
− Q)
expected to be exact only when the hopping V goes to zero. However, if we set U = 0 from the start 
and use
ordinary, ‘weak-coupling’, perturbation theory (i.e. treat

=  1 Σ G
(K)e
′
—ik·rₐ+ik ·rb
δ(K − K′)     (16)
inter-cluster hopping as a perturbation of in-cluster hop-

L
a,b
where the wavevector k has been decomposed in a unique fashion as k = K + k˜, where K belongs to 
the re-duced Brillouin zone BZΓ and k˜ belongs to the recip-
rocal superlattice Γ∗, and likewise for k′. Note however that V (K) = V (k), since the definition 
(12) is invari-ant with respect to translations of Q by a an element of the reciprocal 
superlattice, such as k − K; therefore, Gₐb(K) = Gₐb(k). Since
L
ping), then obviously V is the exact electron self-energy and the basic relation ˆ—1 = Gˆ—1  Vˆ 
follows. In other words, and using the notation of a nearest-neighbor Hub-bard model, the previous 
relation may be viewed either as resulting from the lowest order term (Ξ = G) in a t/U expansion of 
the auxiliary fermion self-energy, or from the exact U = 0 electron self energy (Σ = V ). Need-less 
to say, verifying that the method gives the known U = 0 spectrum is a practical test that is often 
carried in practice. Incidently, Dynamical Mean Field Theory
6

δ(K − K′) =  δ(k − k′ + qs) ,    (17)
s=1
we recover Formula (14).
The qs = 0 term in the above sum is the CPT approx-imation to the translation-invariant Green 
function:
L
(DMFT) also is exact in those two limits. The relation between the two approaches (DMFT and CPT) 
remains an open question.

B. Nature of the approximation

GCPT
 1
(k, z) =
L
Gab
a,b=1
(k, z)e—ⁱᵏ·⁽ʳa—rb)   (18)
It is somewhat difficult to qualify the degree of approx-imation achieved by Cluster Perturbation 
Theory. The

5



























FIG. 3: Spectral functions of the one-dimensional Hubbard model (U = 4t, half-filling) from Cluster 
Perturbation Theory with L = 1 (above) and L = 2 (below).























FIG. 4: Spectral function of the two-dimensional Hubbard model (U = 8t, t′ = −0.4t, n = 2/3) as 
calculated by CPT on four different clusters. The momentum scans are indicated.


approach is exact in the limits U/t = 0, t/U = 0 and L   . The perturbation parameter is the 
interclus-ter hopping V and, according to Sect. II A above, the
V dependence has been dropped from the auxiliary field self-energy Ξ, since only the first diagram 
of Fig. 2 has been kept. However, the CPT Green function itself con-tains terms of all orders in V 
, as seen from the basic
formula (10). This is complicated by the presence of the same physical parameter (the hopping t) 
both within the cluster (in which it is treated exactly) and between the cluster (where it is 
treated perturbatively). In principle, the CPT could be systematically improved by taking into 
account the higher-order diagrams of Fig. 2, but we have already pointed out that their exact 
numerical calcula-tion is impractical. In practice, the CPT approximation is controlled most 
effectively by the cluster size L.
A look at Fig. 3 is enough to demonstrate the tremen-dous advantage of treating clusters exactly.  
Here we treated the one-dimensional, nearest-neighbor Hubbard model at half-filling, with clusters 
of sizes 1 and 2. If L = 1, one falls back to the zeroth-order approximation of strong-coupling 
perturbation theory; this leading order coincides with the Hubbard-I approximation⁷ :
1
G(k, ω) = ω − 2t cos k − U 2/4ω    (21)
The difference between this approximation and the atomic limit lies in the dispersion acquired by 
the two Hubbard bands, and in the momentum-dependent trans-fer of spectral weight between the two 
bands. Note that this is also the zeroth-order case of a calculation that was pushed to fifth order 
(i.e. (t/U )⁵) in Ref. 5. If we now consider the spectral weight obtained from a cluster of size L 
= 2, we already see the main features of the pre-sumed exact result, in particular the weak shadow 
bands that disperse completely from 0 to π, i.e., on the reduced (magnetic) Brillouin zone. Of 
course, the superexchange J = 4t²/U emerges from the exact solution of the two-site cluster and has 
an impact on the corresponding CPT spectrum. The L = 2 spectrum is also closer to the pre-sumed 
exact result than that obtained by strong-coupling perturbation theory at order (t/U )³ (Fig. 3 of 
Ref. 4).
In Fig. 4, we show the spectral function of the two-dimensional Hubbard model (with NN and NNN hop-
ping and density n = 2/3) for four different clusters (il-lustrated on the upper right corner of 
each plot). Minor details may vary from cluster to cluster, but the gross features stay the same : 
(i) the general dispersion of the main band; (ii) the two closely separated bands between the 
points Γ and X, the upper one very close to the Fermi level; (iii) the two well-separated (∆ω  U ) 
fea-tures at the antifoerromagnetic wavevector M = (π, π). The larger the cluster, the more poles 
contribute to the spectral function, making it smoother.

C. The question of boundary conditions

In its usual formulation, Cluster Perturbation Theory requires that the cluster Green function be 
calculated with open boundary conditions, as opposed to periodic boundary conditions.  However, 
this makes the numer-ics a little more demanding, since the wavevector within a cluster is no 
longer a conserved quantum number and the Hilbert space to work with is larger by a factor L.

6

























FIG. 5: Comparison between the spectral function of the one-dimensional, half-filled Hubbard model 
with U = 4t calcu-lated with open boundary conditions on the cluster (above) and periodic boundary 
conditions (below), on a 12-site clus-ter.


It has been suggested⁸ to use periodic boundary condi-tions anyway, by adding the appropriate 
hopping terms within the cluster. The same hopping terms are then subtracted within strong coupling 
perturbation theory, i.e., are added (with the opposite sign) to the perturba-tion V . However, 
doing this produces spectra that are less accurate than the corresponding spectral obtained from 
open boundary conditions (Fig. 5). Since subtract-ing the periodic hopping produces a long-range 
hopping in V , this means that CPT apparently does not perform so well with such long-range 
hopping. Of course, both methods fall back on the exact result in the limiting case U/t = 0, for 
the reason described above.


D. Momentum distribution curves

One of the key advantages of Cluster Perturbation Theory is the possibility to calculate the 
spectral function at any wavevector, whereas exact diagonalizations only allow L wavevectors, many 
of them physically equiva-lent. This allows the calculation of momentum distribu-tion curves (MDC), 
i.e., scans of the spectral function at fixed frequency, as can be measured in modern ARPES 
experiments, or of momentum distribution functions. For instance, Fig. 6a illustrates the spectral 
function, inte-grated over frequency in a small interval just below the Fermi level, plotted as a 
function of wavevector for the two-dimensional Hubbard model with U = 12t, NNN
FIG. 6: Density plots of the spectral function of the two-dimensional Hubbard model with NNN 
hopping t′ = −0.4t, in the first quadrant of the Brillouin zone. In (a), the density is n = 8/9 
(i.e., 11% hole doping) and U = 12t. In (b), n = 10/9 (i.e., 11% electron doping) and U = 4t. In 
both cases, the
noninteracting Fermi surface is shown (dashed curve). The spectral function was integrated over 
frequency in a interval
∆ =  ⁶ t below the Fermi level.


hopping t′ =  0.4t and n = 8/9. This figure should be compared with ARPES results on 
Ca₂—ₓNaₓCuO₂Cl₂⁹, a hole-doped material. One notices a disappearance of the Fermi surface in the 
antinodal directions (π, 0) and (0, π), which coincides with the opening of a pseudogap in those 
directions. By contrast, Fig. 6b shows the same spectral function for n = 10/9 and U = 4t. There, 
the Fermi surface disappears first on “hot spots” lying on the (π, 0)  (0, π) line; at higher 
values of U , the Fermi surface disappears in the nodal direction, but remains in the antinodal 
direction, in contrast to the hole-doped case. This should be compared with ARPES results on 
NCCO¹⁰.


E.  The t − J model

The derivation of CPT given above is specific to Hubbard-like models, i.e., models with only 
on-site re-pulsion and hopping terms. The t  J model, because it involves correlated hopping, seems 
excluded from the method. However, CPT has been applied with some suc-cess to the t  J model in 
Refs 11,12, and this raises the question as to why it can be successful in this case. No rigorous 
answer can be given. However, one may first remark that, near the line J = 4t²/U , the t  J model 
is a low-energy limit of the Hubbard model, and therefore CPT wouls be expected to work, at least 
at low energy. Second, in CPT, the correlated hopping of the t J model is replaced by ordinary 
hopping only between clusters, and for a large cluster this may be of little consequence. Finally, 
it may very well be that the basic formula (13) is also the lowest-order approximant to a 
systematic ap-proximation scheme to the t  J model unknown so far, albeit different from the 
Hubbard-model strong-coupling

7


perturbation theory.


F. Finite temperature

In principle, CPT can be used at finite temperature. Ground state averages are simply replaced by 
thermal av-
The second step is to use the Lanczos algorithm (or the equivalent) to calculate the ground state Ω 
, in the cho-sen sector. One needs to implement a practical encoding of the states. The Hilbert 
space can be factorized into spin-up and spin-down parts : V = V†  V↓. A cluster of L sites with N† 
= N↓ = N has dimension
   L!  2

erages (in the canonical or grand canonical ensembles).
If the cluster is small enough that all eigenstates can
d =
N !(L − N )!
(22)

be calculated, then the finite-temperature extension is a straightforward matter.  In those cases, 
computation time is already short, and a finite temperature is not too much of a numerical burden. 
For instance, the entropy of the two-dimensional Hubbard model and related ther-modynamic 
quantities can be reasonably well calculated on a 2  2 cluster¹³. If the cluster is large enough 
that the Lanczos algorithm is necessary, then the same tech-niques used in exact diagonalizations 
at finite tempera-ture must be used¹⁴. These imply a sampling of initial Lanczos states. In that 
case computation time may be-come very important, and some form of parallelization necessary. Work 
on this topic is in progress.
Incidently, CPT is independent of the way the cluster Green function is calculated. Exact 
diagonalizations us-ing the Lanczos algorithm are appropriate at zero tem-perature, but another 
technique, like Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC), could be used at finite temperature. How-ever, the Green 
function obtained from QMC is defined in imaginary time, and the continuation to real frequency 
(via the maximum entropy method) is not only time-
For instance, a half-filled 12-site cluster has dimension d = 853 776, and storing one state in 
memory (in dou-ble precision) requires 6.5 MB. At 16 sites, this figure becomes 1.2 GB, which is 
impractical unless additional symmetries are used. However, since the method usually demands open 
boundary conditions, translational invari-ance is of no use, and rotational or inversion symmetry 
are typically too much trouble to implement for what they save in memory. Once a good approximation 
to Ω has been obtained, one may then proceed to calculate the electron and hole parts of the Green 
functions :
Gₐb(z) = Gᵉ (z) + Gʰ (z)
    1   
ab     z − H + E₀ ᵇ
Gʰ (z) = ⟨Ω|c†      c |Ω⟩    (23)

where E₀ is the ground state energy and z a complex frequency. In practice, this is done as follows 
: one con-structs the states |φ⟩ = c |Ω⟩ and |φ ⟩ = c |Ω⟩. Then

in the spectral function. At this point it is not clear whether a Monte-Carlo driven CPT would be a 
produc-tive method.


IV. THE CLUSTER GREEN FUNCTION

A. The Lanczos method
φ , after being normalized, is used as an initial state in a second Lanczos iteration, which 
produces a sequence
of orthonormal states φm , in terms of which the Hamil-tonian H is a tridiagonal matrix. At each 
Lanczos step, the product φ′ φm is calculated, and the states φm are not stored, except for the two 
most recent ones, which are used to calculate the next state. After a sufficient num-ber of 
iterations (typically a few hundred), one may write with good accuracy


In this subsection, we will briefly review how to cal-
 
Gᵉ (z) = Σ⟨φ′|φ ⟩x   ,  x  = ⟨φ |    1    |φ⟩



First, since the Hamiltonian conserves separately N† and
N↓, the numbers of spin-up and spin-down electrons on the cluster, there is a practical advantage 
in calculating the Green function at fixed values of N† and N↓ : it saves memory (these numbers are 
not longer conserved once perturbation theory is applied, because of the inter-cluster hopping 
term). One must first identify the sector that contains the ground state. In the absence of 
mag-netic field, the ground state is expected to be a singlet, i.e., to lie in the N† = N↓ sector. 
An interesting ex-ception to this rule is indicated by Lieb’s theorem¹⁵ : on a bipartite lattice 
with A sites on the first sublat-tice and B sites on the second sublattice, the ground state of the 
half-filled, repulsive, nearest-neighbor Hub-bard model has spin |A − B|.
(24)
Since φ₀   φ , one then has, for a given value of z, to solve a tridiagonal system of equations to 
find the column-vector  xm , and this is relatively efficient nu-merically. The same procedure is 
repeated for the hole part Gʰ (z). In practice, one stores in memory the tridi-agonal matrix φm H 
φn for each pair of sites (a, b), as well as the products φ′ φm . This means that the Lanc-zos 
procedure is used only at the beginning, before the sweep over frequencies is performed.
Note that the full Hamiltonian can easily be stored in memory during the Lanczos procedure. Indeed, 
it can be expressed as
H = K† ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ K↓ + VCₒul.   (25)

8

where the last term is the (diagonal) Coulomb repulsion, and the first term is the hopping term (or 
kinetic energy), which acts separately in the space of spin-up and spin-down electrons. The 
diagonal Coulomb term is stored in memory; this costs the equivalent of one Lanczos vector. The 
kinetic energy operators K† and K↓ are also stored in memory, but these are sp√arse matrices of 
relatively small

dimension (typically
negligible.
d), and their memory cost is



B. Filling and superclusters


One of the disadvantages of working with small clus-ters is the restriction this imposes on the 
electron den-sity: only a small sample of L + 1 commensurate fillings is available, in steps ∆n = 
2/L (if we set N† = N↓). This may be alleviated to a large degree by the use of super-clusters, 
i.e., larger clusters made of clusters of different fillings. The hopping terms linking the 
different clusters of the supercluster are treated in perturbation theory to
the same degree as above: (Gˆsc)—¹ = Gˆ—1 − Wˆ , where
FIG. 7: Chemical potential as a function of density in the one-dimensional Hubbard model, as 
calculated by CPT using a supercluster of ten ten-site clusters (dots). This is to be compared to 
the exact result obtained by differentiating the exact ground-state energy density with respect to 
density, fol-lowing the prescription of Ref. 16 (solid line).


reads

Gˢᶜ is the approximate supercluster Green function, G is
the exact cluster Green function (more precisely, the di-     αβ

norb L
αβ

—ik·(rm—rn )

rect sum of the individual Green functions of the clusters
GCPT(k, z) = L
Gmn(k, z)e
(26)

making up the supercluster), and Wˆ is the inter-cluster
a,b=1

hopping matrix. Once Gˢᶜ is known, then the basic CPT
from which we derive the many-band spectral function

formulas (13,18) may be applied to find CPT(k, z). Of
course, this procedure does not increase the accuracy of the method, but it allows for a more 
tunable filling.

Aαβ
(k, ω) = 2 lim
η→0+
Im G
(k, ω + iη + µ)  (27)

For instance, using ten clusters of ten sites allows us to sweep over electron densities in steps 
of 0.02. Fig 7 illustrates the chemical potential µ calculated as a func-tion of density for the 
one-dimensional Hubbard model.
If an electron is annihilated in a combination of bands by the operator uαcα(k), then the relevant 
spectral function is (summation over repeated indices is implicit)

Notice that the accuracy of the method deteriorates at strong coupling as we approach half-filling. 
This is due to
ραβAαβ(k, ω)  ραβ = uαu∗
(28)

the increasing narrowness of the Hubbard bands as U/t becomes large, which makes the density of 
states more strongly peaked. This, in turn, makes the calculation of the Fermi level µ more 
difficult as the band edge is approached. The numerical evaluation of µ is discussed further in 
Sect. VI.



V. MULTI-BAND MODELS

Cluster Perturbation Theory can be applied equally well to multiband Hubbard models, like the 
three-band of Ref. 17, or the four-band model of Ref. 18,19, meant to describe the Physics of CuO₂ 
planes.  For-mula (18) can be readily adapted to the case of many bands by replacing latin indices 
a, b by composite indices (m, α), (n, β), where m, n are site indices and α, β band indices. The 
latter play a spectator role in the calcu-lations of Sect. II B, and the many-band CPT formula
More generally, ραβ can be any suitable density matrix
(with unit trace) and may correspond to a pure state (like above) or to a mixed state, depending on 
the phys-ical process under study.  Giving it a suitable momen-tum dependence may also be a way of 
including matrix-element effects, as in Ref. 20. But the simplest case would be that of a 
photoemission process in which the photo-electron comes from any band with equal probability, in 
which case the density matrix is unity. This scheme was applied in Ref. 8 (albeit using periodic 
boundary condi-tions on the cluster) in studying the spectral function of Sr₂CuO₂Cl₂.
We illustrate in Fig. 8 the spectral function for a three-band Hubbard model. The band parameters 
are those proposed in Ref. 19: (i) A hopping t = 1.6 eV between Cu and O orbitals; (ii) a 
next-nearest-neighbor hopping t′ = 1.1 eV between O orbitals, both diagonally and across a Cu atom; 
(iii) a shift εp =  3 eV of the O bands with respect to the Cu band. In addition, we put an on-site 
repulsion U = 4 eV on the Cu orbital only. This is meant to be a realistic model of CuO₂ planes in

9

(we assume here that G† = G↓).  Since we use a complex-frequency Green function throughout, the 
usual (time-ordered) real-frequency Green function is G†(ω + i0⁺sign(ω  µ)), whereas the retarded 
Green function is simply Gʳᵉᵗ.(ω) = G†(ω + i0⁺). With the help of the spectral representation

G(k, z) =  dω A(k, ω) 
2π z − ω − µ

(30)
we find, after integrating around the upper half-plane,

 dk   ⁰
ε =
(2π)d —∞
dω (ω + µ + ε )A(k, ω)   (31) 2π      ᵏ



FIG. 8: Spectral function for a three-band model of CuO2

The kinetic energy per site εkin may be found in a similar way: starting from
∫  dk 
	

shifted spectral function A˜(k, ω) = A(k, ω − µ) (the value of µ is indicated). The U = 0 
dispersion relations are indicated
(thick lines).
(the factor of 2 comes from the sum over spin), we use the definition of the time-ordered Green 
function
Gσ(k, t) = −i⟨Ω|T ck,σ(0)c† (t)|Ω⟩   (33)


YBCO, except for the value of U , which we set arbitrar-ily. Filling was set to 11/12 (i.e. n = 
11/6) for the three


to express it as
ε  = 2i ∫  dk  ε ∫ dω eⁱω⁰+ G (ω + i0⁺sign(ω − µ))

the upper band has filling 3/4 and the lower two bands
are completely filled. We have also plotted the noninter-acting (U = 0) dispersion relations for 
the three bands
 dk   ⁰
= 2
(2π)d —∞
dω ε A(k, ω)        (34) 2π ᵏ

(thick lines). In the absence of interaction, the spectrum consists, for each wavevector, of three 
equal-amplitude
Therefore, by subtracting (34) from (31), one finds the potential energy per site in terms of the 
spectral function:

delta-function peaks, one for each band. One sees that the interaction has affected mostly the 
upper band, but that the lower (mostly oxygen) bands are also affected.

εpot =
 dk   ⁰
(2π)d —∞
dω
2π (ω + µ − εk)A(k, ω)  (35)

In particular, the upper band shows extended spectral weight from Γ to M, and a gap of order  U/2 
to a narrow, almost dispersionless feature between M and X, lying just above the Fermi level. The 
lowest band shows a small gap near its inflection point (M), and some por-tions of the lower bands 
are somewhat raised by the in-teraction. This calculation is based on a four-site cluster
with three orbitals per site, 25 hopping terms within the
and the double occupancy is simply  = εpₒt/U .
Before calculating the energy and the double occu-pancy from formulas (31,35), the chemical 
potential µ must be known.  But except for special cases with particle-hole symmetry (half-filling, 
with no NNN hop-ping), µ must be calculated from the electron density n by imposing the constraint

cluster and 30 with adjacent clusters.
n = 2
 dk   µ
(2π)d —∞
dω A˜(k, ω)    (36) 2π


VI.  ENERGY, DOUBLE OCCUPANCY AND CHEMICAL POTENTIAL

In this section we will explain how to calculate the average energy per site and double occupancy 
from the one-particle Green function, at zero and finite tempera-ture. The basic ingredient of this 
calculation is the rela-tion between the ground state energy density ε and the
where A˜(k, ω) is the µ-independent, shifted spectral func-tion of Eq. (20). In practice, this is 
done by numerical integration, where the momentum integration is carried before the frequency 
integration, since the evaluation of the Green function is much faster if momentum sweeps are 
performed at fixed frequency.
The formulas (31,35) can then be applied to the CPT spectral function A(k, ω). One basically needs 
to com-pute the two integrals

zero-temperature Green function²¹:

I₁ =
∫  dk  ∫ 0
dω
εkA(k, ω)

∫  dk dω

iω0⁺           +
(2π)  —∞ 2π

ε = −i
(2π)d 2π e
(ω + εk)G†(ω + i0
sign(ω − µ))
(29)
I₂ =
 dk   ⁰
(2π)d —∞
dω ωA(k, ω)    (37) 2π

10















FIG. 9:  Comparison (expressed in relative difference) be-tween the ground-state energy density of 
the half-filled, one-dimensional Hubbard model calculated from the CPT spec-tral weight (Eq. (31)) 
and the exact result computed follow-ing Ref. 16. The results are displayed as a function of the 
hopping t, for U = 2 and various cluster sizes L (connected symbols). For comparison, the exact 
diagonalization values of finite clusters with periodic boundary conditions are also shown (dashed 
lines).


and to take thereafter the combinations
FIG. 10: Same as Fig. 9, this time for the double occupancy, calculated from Eq. (35). An 
extrapolation of the results to infinite cluster size (L → ∞) using a quadratic fit in terms of 1/L 
is also shown, and is accurate to within 0.5%. exact diagonalization results for L = 8 and L = 12 
are also shown.


All these integrals depend on the line broadening η, and are increasingly difficult to compute as η 
decreases. Extrapolating towards η = 0 from moderate values of η (between 0.1 to 0.02) is the 
method of choice. These tricks are also used in the prior calculation of the chemical
n              n       potential from Eq. (36).

ε = I₁ + I₂ + µ 2   εpₒt = −I₁ + I₂ + µ 2   (38)
Some care must be exercised in evaluating these inte-grals. The individual peaks of the spectral 
function being lorentzian curves, they have long tails behaving like 1/ω² at large frequencies.  
Therefore, the integral I₂ above does not exist except in the limit η  0. The way out of this 
problem is to add and subtract a spectral function that integrates analytically and that cancels 
the leading asymptotic behavior. For instance, on may subtract the atomic limit (U → ∞) result

A0(k, ω) = (2  n)δ(ω + U/2) + nδ(ω  U/2)  (39) 2π
from A(k, ω) in the integrand (after a lorentzian broad-ening) and add the corresponding 
contribution to the re-sult.
The integrals are then computed numerically from  Ω₀ to 0, where Ω₀ is a frequency large compared 
to the band-width or the interaction (typically Ω₀  10 max(U, t)). In the improper domain [   , 
Ω₀], the integral is evaluated using the asymptotic expansion of the Green function
1  M₁(k)  M₂(k)
G(k, z) = z +  z2  +  z3  + · · ·   (40)
where the first moments of the simple Hubbard model are22,23
Fig. 9 shows the relative difference between the com-puted ground-state energy density of the 
one-dimensional Hubbard model at half-filling and the known exact result computed from Ref. 16. 
Even with as few as 4 sites per cluster, an accuracy of 1% is achieved. Clusters of 12 sites bring 
this down to 0.2% or less. Notice that the energy density of a bare cluster (no intercluster 
hopping) with periodic boundary conditions (to eliminate edge ef-fects) is not nearly as close 
(dashed lines) to the exact result as the CPT prediction. Fig. 10 shows the same calculation for 
the double occupancy. Here the accuracy obtained is less impressive (4% for a 12-site cluster), but 
a simple quadratic extrapolation as a function of inverse cluster size yields the exact result to 
within 0.5%. More-over, the CPT predictions converge to the exact result in a smoother fashion (as 
a function of t) than exact diago-nalization data. Cluster Perturbation Theory is therefore a quite 
accurate way of computing global quantities like the energy density or the double occupancy.


VII. CONCLUSION

Cluster Perturbation Theory is an economical method for calculating the approximate spectral 
function of Hub-bard models. Its main advantage over exact diagonaliza-tions is the access to a 
continuum of wavevectors and a better approximation to the thermodynamic limit. This,

M₁(k) = εk
1
µ + Un
2
for instance, allows for an investigation of pseudogap phe-nomena (Fig. 6). It is also much faster 
than Quantum

M₂(k) = (εk
− µ) + Un(εk
µ) + U ²n
2
(41)
Monte Carlo calculations at very low temperatures and
may be formulated directly in terms of real frequencies.

11


Its accuracy has been demonstrated here in the calcula-tion of the ground-state energy of the 
one-dimensional Hubbard model. In our opinion, it is a method of choice for exploring parameter 
space and trying to connect real materials to Hamiltonians with local interactions.

Acknowledgments

We thank F. Ronning for showing us ARPES results prior to publication. Stimulating dicussions with 
A.-
M. Tremblay are gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by NSERC (Canada) and FCAR 
(Qu´ebec).




∗ Electronic address: david.senechal@courrier.usherb.ca
¹ Z.-X. Shen and D. Dessau, Phys. Rep. 253, 1 (1995).
² A. Damascelli, D. Lu, and Z.-X. Shen, Journal of Elec-tron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 
117-118, 165 (2001).
³ D. S´en´echal, D. P´erez, and M. Pioro-Ladri`ere, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 522 (2000).
⁴ S. Pairault, D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 5389 (1998).
⁵ S. Pairault, D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Eur.Phys.
J. B 16, 85 (2000).
⁶ A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 13 (1996).
⁷ J. Hubbard, Proc. Royal. Soc. London 276, 238 (1963).
⁸ C. Dahnken, E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, J. Low Temp. Phys. 126, 949 (2002).
⁹ F. Ronning et al., in preparation (unpublished).
¹⁰ N. Armitage, D. Lu, D. Feng, C. Kim, A. Damascelli,
K. Shen, F. Ronning, and Z.-X. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 1126 (2001).
¹¹ M. Zacher, R. Eder, E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 85, 2585 (2001).
¹² M. Zacher, R. Eder, E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, Interna-tional journal of modern physics B 14, 
3783 (2000).
¹³ S. Roy, A.-M. S. Tremblay, and D. S´en´echal, in preparation (unpublished).
¹⁴ J. Jaklic and P. Prelovsek, Phys. Rev. B 49, 5065 (1994).
¹⁵ E. H. Lieb, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1201 (1989).
¹⁶ E. Lieb and F. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1445 (1968).
¹⁷ V. Emery, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794 (1987).
¹⁸ O. Andersen, O. Jepsen, A. Liechtenstein, and I. Mazin, Phys. Rev. B 49, 4145 (1994).
¹⁹ O. Andersen, A. Liechtenstein, O. Jepsen, and F. Paulsen, Journal of the Physics and Chemistry 
of Solids 56, 1573 (1995).
²⁰ C. Dahnken and R. Eder, cond-mat/0109036.
²¹ A. Fetter and J. Walecka, Quantum theory of many-particle systems (McGraw-Hill, San Francisco, 
1971).
²² O. Kalashnikov and E. Fradkkin, Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 59, 9 (1972).
²³ W. Nolting, Z. Phys. 255, 25 (1972).
