Topological superconductivity in a Hubbard model for twisted bilayer cuprates
T. Vibert¹ and D. S´en´echal¹
¹D´epartement de Physique, RQMP & Institut Quantique, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec, Canada 
J1K 2R1
We investigate the emergence of nontrivial topology in a twisted cuprate bilayer described by the 
Hubbard model in the weak-interaction regime. Our results show that the topological character 
depends sensitively on the doping level. For U/t = 3.85, the Chern number assumes a value of
±8 in the electron-doped case, whereas it vanishes (0) in the hole-doped regime. The presence of 
nontrivial topology is further supported by an analysis the associated edge states and their 
chirality in a finite-width geometry, while keeping full correlations.


I. INTRODUCTION

The possible observation of Majorana fermions has stimulated extensive research on possible 
topological su-perconductors [1–7]. The main interest in such systems lies in their potential use 
for realizing qubits that are ro-bust against environmental perturbations [8]. However, the 
interpretation of these edge states as Majorana modes remains controversial [9], motivating further 
theoretical investigations and additional experimental studies.
Given the paucity of intrinsic topological supercon-ductors, an interesting proposal was put forth 
[10] to construct a twisted bilayer of d-wave superconducting cuprates. A twist of nearly 45◦ might 
then induce, by proximity effect, a dₓ2−y2 + idₓy superconducting state that breaks time-reversal 
invariance and has nontrivial topology.  Given that superconductivity has been ob-served in 
monolayer Bi-2212 (Bi₂Sr₂CaCu₂O₈₊δ) [11], this proposal seems realizable in practice.
Theoretically, the analysis of Ref. [10] has been per-formed at he mean-field level, within an 
effective model with attractive interactions.  However, cuprates are strongly-correlated materials 
and the superconducting pairing mechanism is based on the exchange of short-range spin fluctuations 
(see, e.g., [12]). The supercon-ducting properties (critical temperature, order parame-ter, 
superfluid stiffness) are also strongly doping depen-dent. Hence it is interesting, if not 
essential, to inves-tigate the properties of twisted cuprate bilayers within a microscopic model 
that adequately describes high-temperature superconductivity in some universal fashion, even in the 
monolayer. The one-band Hubbard model is the simplest such model. In Refs [13–15], systems with
53.1◦ and 43.6◦ twists were studied in this fashion (these specific twist angles are necessary to 
produce commen-surate systems amenable to the methods used in these works).  Even though these 
studies could identify dop-
ing ranges in which a time-reversal-breaking (TRB) su-
same as in Ref. [13], but this time in a weaker-interaction regime, below the Mott transition. We 
find that there are indeed topological solutions in this regime, even though they are difficult to 
describe in traditional terms, be-cause of the multiplicity of bands in the systems stud-ied. We 
demonstrate the topological character of these solutions by computing the Chern number from the 
ap-proximate Green function found via the variational clus-ter approximation (VCA), and also by 
identifying gapless edge modes in a finite-width system.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we re-view the model used; the superconducting 
pairing fields are adapted to the D₄ symmetry of the system, followed by a short review of the VCA, 
used to computed the su-perconducting order parameter. The computation of the Chern number is then 
discussed and generalized to the interacting case. In Sec. III, we identify doping ranges in which 
a TRB superconducting solution exists and com-pute the Chern number from the Green function. 
Setting the interaction strength to U = 3.85, just below the Mott transition, we find nontrivial 
topology with Chern num-ber ±8 in the electron-doped region, and trivial topology in the hole-doped 
region. This is confirmed by computing the spectral function in a finite-width (ribbon) geometry, 
in the fully correlated case.


II. MODEL AND METHOD

Each layer of the bilayer system is described by the one-band Hubbard model.  The complete 
Hamiltonian consists of one Hubbard Hamiltonian for each layer (H⁽¹,²⁾) and an interlayer 
Hamiltonian (H⊥) containing the interlayer tunneling:
H = H⁽¹⁾ + H⁽²⁾ + H⊥.       (1)
The Hubbard Hamiltonian for each layer is

perconducting solution exists, these solutions were not topological. This was attributed to the 
strong-coupling regime in which these systems were studied (beyond the
H(ℓ) =  trr′ c†
r,r′,σ
cr′ℓσ + U   nrℓ↑nrℓ↓ − µ   nrℓσ .
r         r,ℓ,σ

Mott transition). It is indeed known that strong-enough correlations can destroy topology [16–20].
The present work aims to identify nontrivial topology in a simple Hubbard model for the twisted 
bilayer, the
Here, crℓσ is the electron annihilation operator for spin σ at site r of layer ℓ, nrℓσ the electron 
density operator, and trr′ the hopping amplitude, which include here first-
(t) and second-neighbor (t′) hopping. U is the on-site

2


Coulomb repulsion and µ the chemical potential. We set t = 1 as a unit of energy and t′/t = −0.3, a 
choice appropriate for Bi-2212.
The interlayer Hamiltonian is
Each of these operators changes sign under a π/2 rotation with respect to the z axis (perpendicular 
to the bilayer). The D₄ group contains three different π-rotations about axes lying in the plane of 
the bilayer, and these two op-erators transform under the B₁ and B₂ representations

H⊥ =
3
Vn
n=1


⟨r,r ⟩⊥,n,σ
cr1σcr′2σ + H.c.
,  (2)
of D₄.
The number of theoretical methods that can ade-quately treat the Hubbard model is quite limited. We

where Vn is the interlayer tunneling amplitude and n = 1, 2, 3 labels the type of interlayer 
coupling, as illustrated in Fig. 1. These amplitudes are defined relative to V₁ as V₂ = 0.5V₁ and 
V₃ = 0.3V₁.
This is of course an overly simplified description of the bilayer.  In reality, each layer of 
Bi-2212 would be constituted of two copper-oxide planes.  Moreover, the interlayer tunneling 
amplitudes would likely be weaker and their precise values should be inferred ab initio. We are 
merely performing a proof of concept here, adopt-ing parameter values that magnify the odds of 
finding topological solutions.





V₂
use the variational cluster approximation (VCA) [21–23], a variational method based on Potthoff’s 
self-energy functional approach. The VCA builds upon cluster per-turbation theory (CPT) [24] and 
can be regarded as its variational extension. The first step is to tile the infi-nite lattice into 
identical clusters, and then to divide the Hamiltonian into a part H′ local to the clusters, plus 
an inter-cluster part V : H = H′ + V . The clusters must be small enough so that H′ can be solved 
numerically, via exact diagonalization, for the Green function G(ω) and the self-energy Σ(ω). The 
clusters used in this work are the same as in Ref. [13] and appear on Fig. 1.
The second step is to add to H′ (and consequently sub-tract from V ) one-body operators that 
represent broken symmetry states. In the current problem, these are the pairing operators (4), 
restricted to the clusters. Specifi-cally, we shift
′    ′  1   ˆ   ˆ†   i   ˆ   ˆ†
H → H + B₁r(B₁ + B1) + B₁i(B₁ − B1)
2         2

V₃  V₁
1   ˆ   ˆ†   i
ˆ  ˆ†





FIG. 1. Left panel: Unit cell of the twisted bilayer with a twist angle of θ = 2 arctan ¹  ∼ 53.1◦. 
Sites of the lower (upper) layer are shown in orange (blue). Interlayer tunnel-ing terms are shown 
in gray. The two clusters used in the VCA, delimited by the green octagons, contain 8 and 2 sites, 
respectively. Right panel: Ribbon configuration. The system is infinite along the x-axis and finite 
along the y-axis (here, the width is 5 unit cells only, but calculations were performed on a width 
of 40 unit cells). The red lines indicate the upper and lower edges.


On each layer we define a d-wave superconducting pair-ing operator as follows:
∆ˆ (ℓ) =   crℓ↑cr+xℓ↓ − crℓ↓cr+xℓ↑
r∈ℓ
− crℓ↑cr+yℓ↓ + crℓ↓cr+yℓ↑  .    (3)

Here, x and y denote the lattice vectors on each layer. However, these operators do not transform 
according to the representations of the D₄ symmetry of the bilayer (see Fig. 2 and Table 2 of Ref. 
[13]). To fix this, we introduce the following linear combinations:
+ 2 B₂r(B₂ + B2) + 2 B₂i(B₂ − B2) .  (5)
where B₁ = B₁r + iB₁i and B₂ = B₂r + iB₂i are the “Weiss fields” that need to be set to some 
optimal value. We stress that these are added to H′ only, not to H.
In order to set the Weiss fields to their optimal value, we use Potthoff’s variational principle: 
The Potthoff self-energy functional is defined as

Ωt(Σ) = F (Σ) − Tr ln(−G−¹ + Σ) ,    (6)

where

F (Σ) = Φ(G) − Tr(ΣG)      (7)

is the Legendre transform of Φ(G), the Luttinger–Ward functional. Here, Σ is the self-energy, G the 
Green func-tion, and G₀t the noninteracting Green function. The physical self-energy Σ∗ is obtained 
by applying the vari-ational principle δΩt[Σ]/δΣ = 0 and the value Ωt(Σ∗) at this point is the 
physical grand potential Ω = E − µN .
The key approximation in the VCA is to restrict the variational space to the physical self-energies 
of H′. The key point are that the interaction U is the same in H as in the reference Hamiltonian H′ 
and that the functional F (Σ) is universal, i.e., is the same for H and H′, which differ only via 
their non-interacting part, i.e., G₀. Hence the value of F (Σ) is known from the numerical solution

Bˆ1 = ∆ˆ (1) + ∆ˆ (2)
Bˆ2 = ∆ˆ (1) − ∆ˆ (2) .  (4)
of H′ and the the expression for Ω′ (Σ) can be computed

3


exactly in the form [25]
Ωt(Σ) = Ω′(Σ)
+  dω L   tr ln 1 − V(k˜)G(k˜, ω)  . (8) 2πi N
k˜

Here, V(k˜) is the intercluster hopping matrix, basically the difference between G−¹(H) and 
G−¹(H′), and Ω′(Σ)
The invariant (11) is well-defined if G has no zeros or poles at ω = 0; topological transitions 
hence occur when a Fermi surface appears (G−¹ → 0), or at a Mott transi-tion (G → 0). In general, 
the Green function in Eq. (12) is not exactly equal to G−¹ − Σ; it is rather a “declus-terized”, or 
rather “periodized” version of it [25]. In this work this makes no difference, since clusters do 
not ex-tend beyond one unit cell.  The integral (9) over wave
0        0              vectors is performed on a two-dimensional numerical grid

is the (known) grand potential of H′.  Since the self-energy depends on the Weiss fields B₁,₂, the 
Potthoff functional can be treated directly as a function of these. A stationary point satisfying 
∂Ωt(B)/∂B₁,₂ = 0 at a nonzero Weiss field value signals the presence of super-conductivity in the 
system.
The main purpose of using VCA is to determine the superconducting order parameters and identify 
regions where the orders of types B₁ and B₂ coexist. To assess whether the system is topological, 
we need to compute a topological invariant, namely the Chern number.  In a noninteracting system, 
or in a mean-field description of the interacting system, the Chern number is obtained from the 
Berry curvature F (k):
covering the Brillouin zone. We use 10⁶ grid points, with an adaptive resolution: regions where the 
Berry curva-ture varies strongly are recursively subdivided, thereby improving accuracy without 
overly increasing the total number of grid points.
Finally, let us comment on the cluster geometry, il-lustrated on the left panel of Fig. 1. The unit 
cell is divided into two clusters: one made of two superimposed sites and another of eight sites 
forming an octagon. This way each of the two clusters has the symmetry of the bilayer (D₄) and so 
has the approximate Potthoff func-tional (8). The Weiss fields B₁ and B₂ are only defined on this 
second cluster, but this is enough to propagate superconductivity to the whole system [13].

C = 2π
d²k
(2π)2 F (k)  F (k) =
∂Ay
∂kₓ
− ∂Aₓ
∂ky
(9)


III. RESULTS
where the Berry connection is


Ax,y
(k) = −i
ϵα(k)<0
⟨α, k|∂


kx,y
|α, k⟩ .  (10)
In previous works on this system [13, 14], the repul-sive interaction was set to U = 8, in the 
strong-coupling regime. The superconducting phase appears at finite doping and the order parameter 
goes to zero at half-

The sum is taken over the different occupied bands, in-
dexed by α. In a simple two-band model with spin-orbit interaction, or triplet superconductivity, 
the kets |k⟩ are the eigenvectors of a k-dependent, 2 × 2 Hermitian ma-trix and the Chern number is 
the index of the mappings from the torus (the Brillouin zone) to the unit sphere. In the present 
case, the situation is more complex, since we are dealing with 20 different bands (twice the number 
of sites within the unit cell) and the Chern number does not have an obvious index interpretation 
in terms of simple manifolds, but rather as an index over a Grassmannian manifold U (20)/(U (m) × U 
(20 − m)).
Moreover, in the interacting case, the definition (9) cannot be applied directly since it relies on 
a noninteract-ing Hamiltonian. Instead, we use a Green-function-based topological invariant:
filling (we ignore antiferromagnetism). Suspecting that the Mott transition was the cause of the 
absence of topol-ogy, despite the presence of TRB superconductivity, we chose in this work a value 
of U that lies below the Mott transition.  At U = 3.85, the systems is superconduct-ing at and 
around half-filling. Figure 2 shows the order parameters in three cases: (i) superconductivity is 
only allowed to arise in the B₁ representation of D₄, (ii) the same in the B₂ representation and 
(iii) a homogeneous coexistence of both representations (mixed phase) is al-lowed, with a π/2 phase 
difference: B₁ + iB₂. The latter breaks time-reversal symmetry and may have nontrivial topology.
In contrast to the strong-interaction regime, the order parameter does not vanish at half-filling, 
but is maxi-mum there, and decreases with doping on both sides. In
N =  1  ∫ d3k Trhϵαβγ G∂ G−1G∂ G−1G∂ G−1i ,   the coexistence phase, the two amplitudes B₁ and B₂ 
are

24π2
α     β     γ
(11)
lower, but the combined amplitude |B₁ + iB₂| is compa-
rable to the pure phase amplitudes. The B₁ component

where α, β, γ ∈ {0, 1, 2} and ∂₀ = ∂/∂ω, ∂₁ = ∂/∂kₓ,
∂₂ = ∂/∂ky. The connection between this invariant and the Chern number is discussed in [26–28]. 
Integrating
(11) over frequency yields an expression similar to (11), except that the non-interacting 
Hamiltonian is replaced by the so-called topological Hamiltonian [29]:
ht(k) = −G−¹(k, ω = 0).      (12)
dominates towards hole-doping, whereas the B₂ compo-
nent dominates towards electron doping. Note that the distinction between hole and electron doping 
arises be-cause of the second-neighbor hopping amplitude t′. If the sign of t′ were to change, the 
roles of electrons and holes would be interchanged.
The next step is to assess the topology of this TRB phase. We compute the Chern number numerically 
ac-







0.3


0.2


0.1














U = 3.85


C = 0






B₁ B₂
B₁ coex.
B₂ coex.
|B₁ + iB₂| coex.
4

same lines within the original zones. The red and blue points represent possible nodes on each 
layer, both in the original zones and folded in the reduced zone. This folding scheme explains the 
presence of low-lying states located on each side of the diagonal on the top panel of Fig. 3. The 
additional low lying states along the diago-nal arise because of correlation effects (they are 
absent from a mean-field state) and their position relative to the Fermi level depends on doping.



0.0
C = 8
0.95   1.00   1.05   1.10   1.15   1.20
n
𝑢   U = 3.85, n = 1.05, C = −8
1.0


FIG. 2. Order parameters obtained by VCA and Chern num-ber |C| (green dots) for U = 3.85 as a 
function of electronic density. Dashed lines represent order parameters calculated independently, 
while solid lines represent order parameters in the B1 + iB2 phase. The Chern number was computed 
for a subset of the solutions.



cording to the topological Hamiltonian (12), as explained at the end of the previous section. The 
green dots on Fig. 2 show the computed Chern number, for a subset of solutions, as computed from 
the topological Hamil-tonian (12). The Chern number vanishes below half-filling and takes the value 
−8 above half-filling, indicating that a nontrivial topological phase emerges only in the 
electron-doped regime (the sign is a matter of convention, and could equally be +8 if the complex 
order parameter B₁ + iB₂ had the opposite but energetically equivalent chirality).
Computing the Chern number is a relatively delicate task from a numerical point of view because of 
the small size of the spectral gap, hence the small region of the












−𝑢−













𝑢                  𝑢
kₓ

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Brillouin zone in which the vortex of the Berry connex-ion occurs. To check the validity of this 
Chern number, we must make sure that the system is gapped. Figure 3 shows the spectral weight of 
the electron-doped system at the Fermi level (ω = 0 +iη), for U = 3.85 and 5% dop-ing. Since a 
small but nonzero imaginary part η = 0.001 is added, each pole in frequency “spills” somewhat over 
a small frequency interval and the resulting spectral func-tion is nonzero even in a fully gapped 
state. The intensity in the plot simply represents where in the Brillouin zone one-particle states 
are close to the Fermi level.
From Fig. 3, we see that the low-energy states are local-ized at specific points in the Brillouin 
zone. The location of these points arises from the folding of the Brillouin zone due to the bilayer 
structure: Each layer has its own Brillouin zone, represented by the black square in the bottom 
panel of Fig. 3. The bilayer has a lower trans-lational symmetry, hence a reduced Brillouin zone 
(the green square). The solid red and blue lines correspond to the d-wave nodal directions in each 
layer, folded into the reduced zone, while the dashed lines represent the
FIG. 3. Top panel: Spectral weight of the bilayer at ω = 0 and U = 3.85 in the electron-doped 
region. Bottom panel: Folding of each layer’s Brillouin zone into the bilayer Brillouin zone 
(center square), five times smaller. The nodal lines are indicated in blue (lower layer) and red 
(upper layer).


To confirm the presence of a gap, we show on Fig. 3 the spectral function along a path chosen to 
maximize the spectral weight, indicated by a white dashed line on Fig. 3. This reveals a gap even 
at the would-be nodal points and confirms that the Chern number calculated at this value of the 
chemical potential µ is well-defined. This is also the case (not shown) at all densities where it 
was computed, for the green dots indicated on Fig. 2.
Having established the existence of a gap, we next study the chirality of the edge states. For this 
purpose, the system is placed on a ribbon geometry, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 1.  The 
spectral function is computed separately for the lower and upper edges, rep-resented by the solid 
red lines in Fig. 1.  Each edge is







(𝑢, 0.225𝑢)


         U = 3.85, n = 1.05, C = −8     





0.3

0.2
5

Mean field : B₁ = B₂i = 0.125, µ = −0.625

0.1











(0.225𝑢, 𝑢)
−0.20 −0.15 −0.10 −0.05  0.00  0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20

0.0

−0.1

−0.2

−0.3










𝑢               0               𝑢
k


FIG. 4. Spectral function along the wavevector path indicated on Fig. 3, for the same system. This 
path is chosen so as to go through the nodal points and displays the smallest possible spectral 
gap.
FIG. 5. Edge-state dispersion of a ribbon of width N = 40 unit cells in the mean-field 
approximation, with external pair-ing fields B1,2i = 0.125. The thickness of each line reflects the 
weight of the corresponding edge sites contribution (blue for the lower edge, red for the upper 
edge).



constituted of two sites per unit cell (one per layer) and the edge spectral weight is the 
probability density that a particle, created or destroyed on each edge, have an energy ω.
Let us start with the noninteracting case (U = 0), fol-lowing the approach of Ref. [10]. We 
artificially set values to the pairing fields: B₁r = B₂i = 0.125. At µ = −0.625, the Chern number 
computed from the bulk Green func-tion is C = 4. When the same system is studied in a rib-bon 
geometry with N unit cells in the y-direction, the kₓ-dispersion of the 20N states are readily 
computed, and are shown in Fig. 5 for N = 40. The edge spectral weight is indicated by the 
thickness of each line (“fat bands”), in red (blue) for the upper (lower) edge. There are clearly 
four states crossing the Fermi level, with a clear chiral-ity. Hence there is agreement between the 
boundary and bulk analyses. Note that even if the dispersions crossing the Fermi level correspond 
to proper edge states, the lat-ter do not have a monopoly on the edge sites: Particles occupying 
bulk states also have a nonzero probability of sitting on the edge, as Fig. 5 clearly shows.
Fig. 6 now shows the edge spectral functions in the interacting case, with the same model 
parameters as pre-vious figures. A ribbon of width 40 unit cells was used for these spectral plots. 
Since the Chern number is |C| = 8 in this case, as computed from the bulk Green function,




𝑢














−𝑢




𝑢














−𝑢


upper edge
















lower edge

we expect 8 dispersive peaks crossing the Fermi level and this is indeed what is observed (note 
that the energy win-dow is wider than on Fig. 5). However, the spectrum is that of a correlated 
system: the dispersing features cannot be uniquely ascribed to one-particle states, many secondary 
peaks are precursor to incoherent background, and so on. Nevertheless, the quasiparticle peaks 
crossing the Fermi level are evident, and so is chirality: The spec-tral functions of the two edges 
are not symmetric under kₓ → −kₓ, but are related by a rotation of π in the x–y
−1.00 −0.75 −0.50 −0.25  0.00  0.25  0.50  0.75  1.00



FIG. 6. Top panel : Spectral function on the upper edge sites in the ribbon geometry with a width 
of 40 unit cells at U = 3.85 and µ = 1.58, corresponding to a bulk electron doping of 5% and a 
Chern number |C| = 8. Bottom panel: the same, on the lower edge sites.

6


plane, indicating that each edge supports distinct chiral edge states.
At last, Fig. 7 shows the edge spectral function in the interacting case (for the lower edge only), 
with the same model parameters as in Fig. 6, except for the chemical potential (µ = 1.1) that now 
brings the mean occupation on the hole-doped side (n ∼ 0.98), in the region of the TRB phase that 
has zero Chern number according to the bulk computation (Fig 2). This time chiral edge states still 
exist (we only show the lower edge, the upper edge is identical except for a mirror symmetry kₓ → 
−kₓ), but none of these states cross the Fermi level. This con-firms (i) the relation between edge 
states crossing the Fermi level and topology in the interacting case, and (ii) the lack of 
one-to-one relation between topology and the existence of a spontaneously broken time-reversal 
super-conducting state.

        U = 3.85, µ = 1.1, lower edge     

𝑢











−𝑢
−1.00 −0.75 −0.50 −0.25  0.00  0.25  0.50  0.75  1.00



FIG. 7. Spectral function for the lower edge sites in the ribbon geometry with a width of 40 unit 
cells at U = 3.85 and µ = 1.1, corresponding to a bulk hole doping of 2% and a Chern number C = 0. 
The upper edge is a mirror image when kx → −kx. Note the presence of a gap.
IV. CONCLUSION

For a twisted cuprate bilayer described by the Hubbard model in the weak-interaction regime, we 
find a super-conducting phase that breaks time-reversal symmetry in some range of densities using 
the variational cluster ap-proximation.  In a doping range in the electron-doped region, the 
solutions are topological, as demonstrated by an explicit numerical computation of the Chern number 
derived from the effective topological Hamiltonian. This is corroborated by the presence of a gap 
in the spectral function and by chiral edge states in a finite-width geom-etry, both consistent 
with the computed Chern number. By contrast, other time-reversal symmetry breaking so-lutions have 
trivial topology (mostly on the hole-doped side).  This is a proof of principle that topological 
su-perconductivity can arise in this system when modeled microscopically, but only in the 
weak-coupling regime. This topology is destroyed in the strong-coupling regime, where the actual 
materials reside.  This study shows that previous results obtained in the strong-coupling regime 
[13], where no topology arises, were not an arte-fact of the method used, but rather the effect of 
strong correlations. A natural next step is to consider a more re-alistic model that captures the 
behavior of Bi-2212 across both weak- and strong-coupling regimes. Such a model should incorporate 
hopping parameters obtained ab ini-tio and explicitly include copper and oxygen orbitals.



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Conversations  with  P.  Fournier,  E.  Lantagne-Hurtubise and A.-M. Tremblay are gratefully 
acknowl-edged. T.V. was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (Canada) 
under Grant No. RGPIN-2020-05060.




[1] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon,
J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yaz-dani, Observation of majorana fermions in 
ferromagnetic atomic chains on a superconductor, Science 346, 602 (2014).
[2] T. Machida, Y. Sun, S. Pyon, A. Takeda, Y. Kohsaka, and T. Hanaguri, Zero-energy vortex bound 
state in the superconducting topological surface state of fe(se,te), Na-ture Materials 18, 811 
(2019).
[3] P. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, K. Yaji, Y. Ishida, Y. Ko-hama, X. Dai, Z. Fang, et al., Observation 
of topological superconductivity on the surface of an iron-based super-conductor, Science 360, 182 
(2018).
[4] D. Wang, L. Kong, P. Fan, H. Chen, S. Zhu, W. Liu,
L. Cao, Y. Sun, et al., Stm study on vortex states and ma-jorana zero modes in fese-based 
superconductors, Fron-tiers of Physics 17, 63201 (2022).
[5] P. Hosur, P. Ghaemi, R. S. K. Mong, and A. Vishwanath, Majorana modes at the ends of 
superconductor vortices in doped topological insulators, Physical Review Letters 107, 097001 
(2011).
[6] Y. S. Hor, A. J. Williams, J. G. Checkelsky, P. Roushan,
J. Seo, Q. Xu, H. W. Zandbergen, A. Yazdani, N. P. Ong, and R. J. Cava, Superconductivity in 
cuxbi2se3 and its implications for pairing symmetry, Physical Review Letters 104, 057001 (2010).
[7] L. Fu and E. Berg, Odd-parity topological superconduc-tors: Theory and application to 
cuxbi2se3, Physical Re-view Letters 105, 097001 (2010).
[8] A. Y. Kitaev, Unpaired Majorana fermions in quantum wires, Phys.-Usp. 44, 131 (2001).
[9] E. Dumitrescu, B. Roberts, S. Tewari, J. D. Sau, and
S. Das Sarma, Majorana fermions in chiral topologi-cal ferromagnetic nanowires, Phys. Rev. B 91, 
094505

7


(2015).
[10] O. Can, T. Tummuru, R. P. Day, I. Elfimov, A. Damas-celli, and M. Franz, High-temperature 
topological super-conductivity in twisted double layer copper oxides, Nat. Phys. 17, 519 (2021).
[11] Y. Yu, L. Ma, P. Cai, R. Zhong, C. Ye, J. Shen, G. D.
Gu, X. H. Chen, and Y. Zhang, High-temperature su-perconductivity in monolayer Bi₂Sr₂CaCu₂O₈₊δ, 
Nature 575, 156 (2019).
[12] N. Kowalski, S. S. Dash, P. S´emon, D. S´en´echal, and A.-
M. Tremblay, Oxygen hole content, charge-transfer gap, covalency, and cuprate superconductivity, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2106476118 (2021).
[13] X. Lu and D. S´en´echal, Doping phase diagram of a Hub-bard model for twisted bilayer 
cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 105, 245127 (2022).
[14] M. B´elanger and D. S´en´echal, Doping dependence of chiral superconductivity in near 45◦ 
twisted bilayer cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 109, 045111 (2024).
[15] M. B´elanger and D. S´en´echal, Interlayer bias effect on time-reversal symmetry breaking in 
twisted bilayer cuprates, Physical Review B 109, 075111 (2024).
[16] J. Imriˇska, L. Wang, and M. Troyer, First-order topo-logical phase transition of the 
haldane-hubbard model, Physical Review B 94, 035109 (2016).
[17] I. N. Karnaukhov and E. E. Krasovskii, Topological states in a chain of interacting electrons, 
Scientific Re-ports 16, 3750 (2026).
[18] S. Rachel and K. Le Hur, Topological insulators and mott physics from the hubbard interaction, 
Physical Review B 82, 075106 (2010).
[19] A. Amaricci, J. C. Budich, M. Capone, B. Trauzettel, and
G. Sangiovanni, Strong correlation effects on topological quantum phase transitions in three 
dimensions, Physical
Review Letters 114, 185701 (2015).
[20] J. Wu, J. P. L. Faye, D. S´en´echal, and J. Maciejko, Quan-tum cluster approach to the spinful 
Haldane-Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 93, 075131 (2016).
[21] M. Potthoff, Self-energy-functional approach to systems of correlated electrons, The European 
Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter 32, 429 (2003).
[22] C. Dahnken, M. Aichhorn, W. Hanke, E. Arrigoni, and
M. Potthoff, Variational cluster approach to spontaneous symmetry breaking: The itinerant 
antiferromagnet in two dimensions, Physical Review B 70, 245110 (2004).
[23] M. Potthoff, Variational Cluster Approximation, in DMFT at 25: Infinite dimensions, Lecture 
Notes of the Autumn School on Correlated Electrons 2014, edited by
E. Pavarini, E. Koch, D. Vollhardt, and A. Lichtenstein (Forschungszentrum Ju¨lich, 2014).
[24] D. S´en´echal, D. Perez, and M. Pioro-Ladri`ere, Spectral Weight of the Hubbard Model through 
Cluster Perturba-tion Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 522 (2000).
[25] T. N. Dionne, A. Foley, M. Rousseau, and D. S´en´echal, Pyqcm: An open-source python library 
for quantum clus-ter methods, SciPost Physics Codebases , 023 (2023).
[26] X.-L. Qi, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Topological field theory of time-reversal invariant 
insulators, Physical Review B 78, 195424 (2008).
[27] S. Lovesey, Topological insulators and topological super-conductors, by b. andrei bernevig 
with taylor l. hughes, Contemporary Physics 55, 353 (2014).
[28] D. Leßnich, Interplay of Electronic Correlations and Topology in the Hubbard Model, Ph.D. 
thesis, Goethe-Universita¨t, Frankfurt am Main (2023).
[29] Z. Wang and S.-C. Zhang, Strongly correlated topologi-cal superconductors and topological 
phase transitions via Green’s function, Phys. Rev. B 86, 165116 (2012).
