Dynamical Mean-Field Theory within the Full-Potential Methods: Electronic structure of Ce-115
materials
Kristjan Haule, Chuck-Hou Yee, Kyoo Kim
Department of Physics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
(Dated: October 22, 2018)
We implemented the charge self-consistent combination of Density Functional Theory and Dy-namical
Mean Field Theory (DMFT) in two full-potential methods, the Augmented Plane Wave and the Linear
Muffin-Tin Orbital methods. We categorize the commonly used projection methods in terms of the
causality of the resulting DMFT equations and the amount of partial spectral weight retained.  The
detailed flow of the Dynamical Mean Field algorithm is described, including the computation of
response functions such as transport coefficients. We discuss the implementation of the impurity
solvers based on hybridization expansion and an analytic continuation method for self-energy. We
also derive the formalism for the bold continuous time quantum Monte Carlo method. We test our
method on a classic problem in strongly correlated physics, the isostructural transition in Ce
metal. We apply our method to the class of heavy fermion materials CeIrIn5, CeCoIn5 and CeRhIn5 and
show that the Ce 4f electrons are more localized in CeRhIn5 than in the other two, a result
corroborated by experiment. We show that CeIrIn5 is the most itinerant and has a very anisotropic
hybridization, pointing mostly towards the out-of-plane In atoms. In CeRhIn5 we sta-bilized the
antiferromagnetic DMFT solution below 3 K, in close agreement with the experimental N´eel
temperature.

PACS numbers: 71.27.+a,71.30.+h


I. INTRODUCTION

One of the most active areas of condensed matter the-ory is the development of new algorithms to
simulate and predict the behavior of materials exhibiting strong cor-relations. Recent developments
in the dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT)¹, a powerful many-body approach, hold great promise for
more accurate and realistic de-scriptions of physical properties of this challenging class of
materials.
The crucial step towards realistic description of strongly correlated materials was the formulation
of DFT+DMFT²–⁴, a method formed by the combination of density functional theory (DFT) and DMFT (for
a review see Ref. 5). To date, this method already has substantially advanced our understanding of
the physics of the Mott transition in real materials and demonstrated its ability to explain
phenomena including the structural phase diagrams of actinides⁶–⁸, phonon response⁹, optical
conductivity¹⁰,¹¹, valence and x-ray absorption¹²–¹⁴ and transport¹⁵ of archetypal strongly
correlated materials.
At present, much effort is devoted to the development of a robust and precise implementation of
DFT+DMFT using state of the art DFT electronic structure codes¹⁶–²⁰ and advanced impurity
solvers²¹–²⁴.  This article de-scribes in detail the implementation of this method within
full-potential codes. There are three major is-sues that arise in DFT+DMFT implementations: i)
qual-ity of the basis set, ii) quality of the impurity solvers, and iii) choice of correlated
orbitals onto which the full Green’s function is projected. Modern DFT implemen-tations largely
resolve the first issue, recent development of new impurity solvers²¹–²³,²⁵–²⁷,²⁹ have focused
atten-tion on the second, while the third is rarely discussed in
the literature. Many DFT+DMFT proposals in the lit-erature are based on downfolding to low energy
model Hamiltonians²,¹⁹,²⁰,²⁸, which requires an atomic set of orbitals and treats the kinetic
operator on the level of an effective tight binding model. In contrast, we avoid the ambiguities of
downfolding and instead keep the ki-netic part of the Hamiltonian and electronic charge ex-pressed
in a highly accurate full potential basis set. The advantage of our method is its ability to
perform fully self-consistent electronic charge calculations. We con-centrate here on the Linear
Augmented Plane Wave basis (LAPW)³⁰ as implemented in the Wien2K code³¹ and the LMTO basis as
implemented in LmtArt³², in combina-tion with the impurity solvers based on the hybridization
expansion²¹,²³–²⁵.
The first half of the article introduces the basic steps of implementing the DFT+DMFT algorithm and
provides a pedagogical introduction to the method. Section II is devoted to a crucial element of
the DFT+DMFT formal-ism, namely the projection of the full electronic Green’s function to the
correlated subset. We show that the pro-jection used in the LDA+U method leads to non-causal
DFT+DMFT equations, while the projection on to the solution of the Schr¨odinger equation within the
Muffin-Tin (MT) spheres misses electronic spectral weight. We propose a new projection that leads
to causal DMFT equations and captures all electronic spectral weight. Section III derives the
DFT+DMFT equations from a Baym-Kadanoff-like functional formalism.  Section IV provides a detailed
flowchart of all the steps of the al-gorithm. In section V we discuss the necessary changes to the
tetrahedron method when used in the context of DMFT. Section VI described the algorithm to compute
transport properties within DFT+DMFT. Section VII

2


describes the impurity solvers based on the hybridiza-tion expansion, the One Crossing
Approximation (OCA), and the Bold continuous time quantum Monte Carlo al-gorithm (b-CTQMC).
Finally, section VIII discusses a new algorithm for analytic continuation of the self-energy from
the imaginary to real axis.
In the second half of the article, we describe the re-sults obtained by applying our new
implementation of DFT+DMFT to several correlated materials. As a first test of the algorithm, in
section IX we present its appli-cation to elemental cerium.  Section X is devoted to a class of
heavy fermion materials, CeRhIn₅, CeCoIn₅ and CeIrIn₅, dubbed Ce-155 materials. We show the
differ-ence in the electronic structure among these three mate-rials and demonstrate that the Ce 4ƒ
electrons are most localized in CeRhIn₅ and order antiferromagnetically be-low TN   3 K, in
agreement with experiment, while the Ce 4ƒ electrons are most itinerant in CeIrIn5.  We ex-plain
the origin of the subtle difference between the three Ce-115 compounds from the electronic
structure point of view.


II. PROJECTION ON TO CORRELATED ORBITALS WITHIN FULL-POTENTIAL
METHODS

DFT+DMFT contains some aspects of band theory, adding a “frequency-dependent local potential” to
the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian. It also contains some aspects of quantum chemistry, carrying out an
exact local con-figuration interaction procedure by summing all local di-agrams, which requires the
definition of an “atomic-like” or “local” Green’s function. The operation of extracting the local
Green’s function  (r, r′) from the full Green’s function G(r, r′) is called projection (or
truncation). The reverse operation of expressing the local time-dependent potential Σ(ω), derived
from the solution of the atomic problem in the presence of a mean-field environment, is called
embedding. The various DFT+DMFT implemen-tations differ not only in the choice of basis set, but
also in the choice of the projection-embedding step.  These ingredients are sketched schematically
in Fig. 1.  The projection-embedding step connects the atomic and solid state physics, and its
proper definition is a conceptual is-sue of DFT+DMFT method.
In the current formulation of DFT+DMFT⁵,³³,³⁴, one must define the correlated orbitals to which the
Coulomb correlation is applied, i.e., Σ(r, r′) = ξξ' χξ(r)Σξξ' χξ∗' (r′), where χξ(r) is a
localized or-bital.  Usually, this is achieved by transforming the DFT Hamiltonian to a set of
localized Wannier orbitals.  These Wannier orbitals are then identi-fied as the local correlated
orbitals of DMFT. Var-ious choices of these orbitals were proposed in the literature, including
tight-binding LMTO’s²,³, non-orthogonal LMTO’s¹⁶, Nth-order Muffin-Tin orbitals³⁵,
numerically-orthogonalized LMTO’s³⁶, and maximally-




















FIG. 1:  Schematic diagram of the projection-embedding step in the DFT+DMFT algorithm. The full
Green’s func-tion of the solid G(r, r′) is truncated to its local counterpart PˆG = GLL' . The
impurity solution delivers an effective local
potential, which is embedded (Eˆ) into the Dyson equation of the solid. The DMFT self-consistency
condition (DMFT-SCC) connects the two.


localized Wannier orbitals²⁰,³⁷. The basis functions must fully respect the symmetries of the
problem and be atom-centered, rather than bond-centered. Hence maximally-localized Wannier
functions³⁸ are not a good starting point for DMFT.
Localized basis sets are a better starting point for our purposes, but the non-orthogonality of
these sets pose a serious challenge.  Straighforward orthogonalization mixes the character of the
orbitals, resulting in mixed the partial occupancies and partial density of states, leading to
incorrect partial electron counts. For example, within modern DFT implementations, cerium metal has
approx-imately one 4ƒ electron. Na¨ıve orthogonalization results in a considerably higher 4ƒ
electron count, leading to an unphysical DMFT solution.
Even more challenging is the formulation of the good localized orbitals in full-potential basis
sets. Here, mul-tiple basis functions are used to obtain more variational freedom.  To implement
DMFT in such basis sets, the group of orbitals representing the correlated electrons in the solid
must be contracted to form a single set of atomic-like heavy orbitals, i.e., one 4ƒ orbital per Ce
atom, one 3d orbital per Fe atom, etc.
A straighforward projection on to the orbital angular momentum eigenfunctions Ylm   YL leads to
non-causal DMFT equations, which result in an unphysical auxiliary impurity problem.  The second
often-employed choice is the projection on to the solution of the Schr¨odinger (Dirac) equation
inside the MT sphere ul(Eν, r)YL(ˆr). While this choice is certainly superior to the
straighfor-ward projection, it does not take into account the contri-butions due to the energy
derivative of the radial wave

3


function u˙l(Eν, r)YL(ˆr) and the localized orbitals (LO) at other energies ul(Eν′ , r)YL(ˆr), and
hence misses some electronic spectral weight of the correlated orbital. Alter-native choices are
possible which simultaneously capture all spectral weight and obey causality. We implemented one of
them and we believe it is superior to other choices in the literature.
The central objects of DMFT are the local Green’s function and the local self-energy of the
orbitals within the correlated subset. We specify the projection scheme by the projection operator
P (rr′, τ LL′), which defines the mapping between real-space objects and their orbital counterparts
(r, r′)  (L, L′) (see Fig. 1). The operator Pˆ acts on the full Green’s function G(r, r′) and gives
the
which is the central object of the functional definition of the DMFT described below. In general,
the two opera-tors Pˆ and Eˆ could be different, but they must satisfy the condition Eq. (3).
The two simplest projections, namely, the projection on to the orbital angular momentum functions
YL, and the projection on to the solution of the Schr¨odinger equa-tion, can be explicitly written
as
P ⁰(rr′, τ LL′) = YL(ˆrτ )δ(r − r′)YL∗' (ˆr′τ )   (5)
P ¹(rr′, τ LL′) = YL(ˆrτ )u⁰(rτ )u⁰ (r′ )Y ∗' (ˆr′ )  (6)
where rτ = r  Rτ is the vector defined with the ori-gin placed at the atomic position Rτ , and
u⁰(r) is the

correlated Green’s function Gτ
5,16
'
solution of the radial Schr¨odinger equation for angular
momentum l at a fixed energy Eν.

Gτ  = ∫ drdr′P (rr′, τ LL′)G(rr′).    (1)

The integrals over r and r′ are performed inside the sphere of size S around the correlated atom at
position τ . The subscript L can index spherical harmonics lm, cubic harmonics, or relativistic
harmonics jmj, depend-ing on the system symmetry. We always choose the basis which minimizes the
off-diagonal elements of the corre-lated Green’s function in order to reduce the minus-sign problem
in Monte-Carlo impurity solvers. In general, Pˆ is a multidimensional tensor with one pair of
indices in the space of local correlated orbitals (τ LL′) and the other
In the following, we will show that the projection P ⁰, used in some implementations of DMFT¹⁷,
captures the full spectral weight of the correlated character L, but leads to non-causal DMFT
equations. On the other hand P ¹ gives causal DMFT equations, but misses some spec-tral weight.
In our view, a good DFT+DMFT implementation should satisfy the following conditions
(1) Correct correlated spectral weight : The projected density of states, computed from the
projected Green’s function,
1

pair in the space of the full basis set, which can be ex-
pressed in a real space (rr′) or Kohn-Sham (k, ij) basis,
ρL(ω) =
2πi
[G†LL(ω) − GLL(ω)],    (7)

where i and j are band indices.
The inverse process of embedding Eˆ, i.e. the mapping between the correlated orbitals and
real-space (L, L′) (r, r′), is defined by the same four-index tensor. How-ever, instead of
integrals over real-space, its application is through a discrete sum over the local degrees of
free-dom,
should capture the partial electronic weight in-side a given MT sphere at all frequencies, i.e., ρ
(ω) =! ρLDA(ω). In particular, LL' must include the electronic weight contained in u˙l and local
or-bitals. Projection should not include any weigh of other character, nor miss correlated weight.

Σ(r, r′) =
τ LL'∈H
P (r′r, τ L′L)Στ '
(2)
(2) DMFT equations are causal : For any causal self-energy Σ, the DMFT self-consistency condition

Here LL′  H means to only sum over correlated or-bitals. In actinides, the sum would run over 5ƒ
orbitals, in lanthanides over 4ƒ and in transition metals over 3d orbitals. τ runs over all atoms
in the solid and r over the full space. Note that within the correlated Hilbert sub-space, the
embedding and projection should give unity PˆEˆ = I, i.e.,
∫ drdr′P (rr′, τ L₁L₂)P (r′r, τ′L₃L₄) = δL1L4 δL2L3 δττ' ,(3)

while the projection from the full Hilbert space to the cor-related set, followed by embedding,
gives the correlated local Green’s function in real space EˆPˆG(rr′) = G(r, r′)
G(r, r′) =                     (4)
      1
=
ω − Eimp − Σ − ∆
DFT      1
k
k
should give a causal hybridization function ∆(ω). Here we used projections Pk in momentum space as
opposed to their real-space definitions in Eqs. (1) and (5), (6).
(3) Sufficient accuracy of the hybridization function: The hybridization function is usually very
sensi-tive to the choice of the projector. Therefore, we require that in the relevant low energy
region, the hybridization function is similar to its DFT coun-
—1

τ LΣL'∈H
P (r′r, τ L′L) ∫

dr₁dr₂P (r₁r₂, τ LL′)G(r₁r₂)
terpart. Explicitly, ∆(ω) = ω  Eimp  (PG₀)
must be sufficiently close to its DFT estimate,
∆(ω) = ω−Eimp−(P ⁰G₀)—¹. Here G₀(r, r′) stands

4


for the full Green’s function G(r, r′) when Σ = 0. The choice of Σ = 0 is dictated by the fact that
the hybridization ∆, computed by P ⁰ is not well


The projectors (5) and (6) can be expressed in the Kohn-Sham basis:
∫



that we want to project the full Hilbert space to
a correlated subset with pure angular momentum, either f or d, but not to a mixure of characters.
(4) Good representation of kinetic energy and elec-tronic density: Finally, it is crucial to
faithfully represent the kinetic energy operator ∇2 and elec-
Hence, projector P ⁰ takes the form
P ⁰(ij, τ LL′)
= ∫ drdr′ψi∗k(r)YL(ˆrτ )δ(r − r′)YL∗' (ˆr′τ )ψjk(r′)
= Σ Aτκ∗(k)Aτκ' (k)⟨uτκ|uτκ' ⟩    (13)

tronic density in real space, a feat most modern DFT implementations achieve. The DFT+DMFT
iL
κκ'
jL'
l  l'

implementation should not reduce the precision al-ready achieved in DFT underlying code.
Downfolding to only a few low energy bands clearly vi-
Using projector P ⁰, we get the following expression for the partial density of states
D  (ω) = Σ Aτκ∗(k)Aτκ' (k)⟨uτκ|uτκ' ⟩δ(ω + µ − ε )

olates the condition number (3), since the hybridization   τL
outside the downfolded window vanishes. A more severe problem is that downfolding approximates the
kinetic en-
iL    iL    l   l
κκ'ki
ki

(14)

ergy operator by expressing it in a small atomic-like basis set, hence condition (4) is violated.
Therefore, we will fo-cus our discussion on DFT+DMFT implemented within full-potential basis sets
where all bands are kept at each stage of the calculation. Downfolding to a sufficiently large
energy window may sometimes be helpful due to its conceptual simplicity, but this approach can not
com-pute the electronic charge self-consistently, as is possible in our implementation. Moreover,
the localized orbitals chosen in the downfolding procedure combined with the limited number of
hoppings retained often cannot faith-fully represent the original Kohn-Sham bands.
To be more concrete, we will give the proofs of the
which exactly coincides with the DFT partial DOS.
Hence P ⁰ satisfies the condition number (1). However, it does not lead to causal DMFT equations.
To show that, consider the limit of a diverging self-energy, Σ   i  , as is relevant for the Mott
insulators. Despite the diverging Σ, the projection must still produce a finite hybridization. In
the case when all the bands at the energy of the pole are correlated, the hybridization should
vanish. In this limit, the DMFT self-consistency condition (8) takes the form
(Στ + ∆)—¹'
= Σ Pk(ji, τ LL′) " Σ Pk(::, τ′L₂L₃)Στ

“weight loss problem” and “causality problem” within the
full-potential LAPW basis. The equivalent derivation is

kij

L2L3τ'
L3L2
ij

possible for the full-potential LMTO basis.  Inside the MT spheres, the full-potential LAPW basis
functions can be written³⁰
where :: stands for the two band indices constituting a matrix in ij to be inverted. Since ∆ is
finite while Σ diverges, we neglect ∆ to obtain the condition for causal

τκ
k+K,L
Lτκ
uτκ(rτ )YL(ˆrτ )    (9)
projection,
Σ     ′  τ

where κ = 0 corresponds to the solution of the Schr¨odinger equation ul(Eν, rτ ) at a fixed energy
Eν,
δLL'' =

kij,τ L'
Pk(ji, τ LL )ΣL'L'' ×

κ = 1 to the energy derivative of the same solution
× " Σ
Pk(::, τ′L₂L₃)Στ
#—1
.    (16)

u˙l(Eν, rτ ), and κ = 2, 3, . . . to a localized orbitals at ad-
ditional linearization energies E′ , E′′, . . .. Here τ runs
L2L3τ'
L3L2
ij

ν  ν
over the atoms in the unit cell.
The Kohn-Sham states ψik(r) are superpositions of the basis functions
ᵏ χk₊K(r)      (10)
K
and take the following form inside the MT spheres:
τκ   τκ
iL   l
τ Lκ
τκ          τκ    k
∫ dˆrτ YL∗(ˆrτ )ψik(r) = Σκ Aτκ(k)uτκ(rτ ).
This equation must be satisfied for any matrix form of the self-energy Σ. Moreover, it has to be
satisfied for each L and L′′. We will show below that Eq. (16) is satisfied for a separable
projection (see Eq. 19 for a definition), while for a non-separable projection, it likely is not.
One can check explicitely that P ⁰ violates the condition Eq. (16). Only after applying an
additional trace over LL′′ will the two matrices P Σ cancel. However, for any given choice of LL′′,
P ⁰ does not satisfy the causality condition. Instead a pole in the self-energy results in a
diverging ∆, with the imaginary part having the wrong sign. The projec-tion P ⁰ is implemented in
the qtl package³⁹ of Wien2K³¹.



The LDA+U implementation within Wien2K⁴⁰ also uses P ⁰, but this does not cause any causality
issues since the problem is unique to DFT+DMFT. Additionally, simple impurity solvers such as
Hubbard-I (Ref. 17) do not in-corporate a true hybridization so they also avoid issues with
causality.
Finally, let us mention an attractive feature of P ⁰. Within this scheme, the self-energy is
independent of the radial distance from the atom rτ , having only angular dependence in the form
Σ(ˆr, ˆr′). This matches the con-ceptual fact that the impurity solver within the DMFT framework
can not determine the radial dependence of the self-energy. The impurity solver can only be used to
obtain the angular dependence of Σ by determining the expansion coefficeints ΣLL' . In the absence
of any knowl-edge of the radial dependence of Σ, the natural choice is a constant function,
independent of radius rτ . Since Σ(r, r′) is a function of two vectors, a radial delta func-tion
would be an obvious choice. However, issues with causality preclude the use of this projection.
The second projection P ¹ of Eq. (6) takes the following form in the Kohn-Sham basis:

P ¹(ij, τ LL′) =
Σ Aτκ(k)Aτκ'∗(k)⟨uτκ|u⁰⟩⟨u⁰ |uτκ' ⟩. (17)
5

Comparing Eq. (18) with (14), we notice that ⟨uτκ|uτκ' ⟩ is replaced by u  u  u u  , which leads to
incorrect spectral weight. In particular, for κ = 1, the original overlap in Eq. (14) is u˙τ u˙τ ,
while the overlap obtained by P ¹, vanishes.
Causality is not violated for any projection P , which is separable, i.e., can be cast into the
form


P ᵏ(ij, τ LL′) = U ᵏτ U ᵏτ∗.      (19)


The condition Eq. (16) can then be expressed as


1 =   U kτ†(U kτ Στ U kτ†)—1U kτ Στ     (20)
k



which is clearly satisfied when U ᵏτ†U ᵏτ is invertible ma-trix because U†(U ΣU†)—¹U Σ U†U (U†U )—¹
= 1. This is satisfied when the Kohn-Sham Hilbert space is of larger

iL
κκ'
jL'
l  l  l'  l'
dimension than the correlated Hilbert space. The projec-tion P ¹ leads to causal DMFT equations,
and therefore is

The partial density of states computed from the corre-
lated Green’s function using P ¹ is
DτL(ω) =                     (18)
Σ Aτκ(k)Aτκ'∗(k)⟨uτκ|u⁰⟩⟨u⁰|uτκ' ⟩δ(ω + µ − ε  )

a better choice than P ⁰. However, some spectral weight is lost at energies away from the
linearization energy Eν. To this end, we also implemented an alternative projection within Wien2K
package³¹, which preserves both causal-ity and spectral weight. This projector is given by


P ²(rr′, τ LL′) = Σ ψ (r)Aτκ(k)⟨uτκ|uτ⁰⟩⟨uτ⁰|uτκ' ⟩Aτκ'∗(k)ψ∗ (r′) ×
u,,   Σ  Aτκ1 Aτκ2∗⟨uτκ1 |uτκ2 ⟩ !   Σ  Aτκ1∗Aτκ2 ⟨uτκ1 |uτκ2 ⟩ !
Σ  Aτκ1 Aτκ2∗⟨uτκ1 |uτ 0⟩⟨uτ 0|uτκ2 ⟩  Σ  Aτκ1∗Aτκ2 ⟨uτκ1 |uτ 0⟩⟨uτ 0|uτκ2 ⟩ .  (21)



Here index L runs over the local basis in which the green’s
P ²(ii, LL) is identical to P ⁰(ii, LL) and hence the par-
k                k

function is minimally off-diagonal (cubic harmonics or relativistic harmonics).
The projector is separable, as postulated in Eq. (19), and the transformation U is
tial density of states DL(ω), obtained by P ², is identical to Eq. (14). Hence the projection
correctly captures the partial spectral weight. Knowledgeable reader would no-tice that the
projection is slightly non-local because Sτ

U ᵏτ = Σ Aτκ(k)⟨uτκ|uτ⁰⟩Sτ
(22)
is weakly momentum dependent. At energies where u˙


with
iL     iL
κ
l  l  iL
or local orbital substantially contribute to the spectral
weight (away from the Fermi level), we give up locality in expense of correctly capturing the
spectral weight.

s  Σ  Aτκ1 Aτκ2∗⟨uτκ1 |uτκ2 ⟩
All  projection  schemes  lead  to  slightly  non-

SiL =  Σ
Aτκ1 Aτκ2∗⟨uτκ1 |uτ 0⟩⟨uτ 0|uτκ2 ⟩ (23)
orthonormal correlated Green’s function.   This is




6

have an orthonormal impurity problem, we compute  construction of the Wannier functions using an
arbitrary
the overlap Σ ΣP ²(ii, τ LL′) = Oτ ' and renormalize  set of localized orbitals. In their work, the
LDA Hamil-

Finally, we remark that the segment of our code which builds projections P ⁰, P ¹ and P ² within
Wien2K³¹ is based on the qtl package of Pavel Novak³⁹.
Similar projections within LDA+DMFT method were proposed before. In particular the method by B.
Amadon et.al.²⁰ proposed to construct the Wannier functions for the correlated subset only, while
the DMFT equations were solved in the Kohn-Sham basis, restricted to some subset of low energy
bands.  The local orbitals used for the projection were either all-electron atomic partial waves in
the PAW framework, or pseudo-atomic wave functions in mixed-basis pseudopotential code.  Hence, in
the language of projectors, the method was similar to choosing the projector to be P = |χR  >< χR
|, where
purpose of obtaining the DMFT self-energy. This sim-plifies the self-consistent DMFT problem, but
makes it impossible to implement the charge self-consistency. Fi-nally, Savrasov et.al.¹⁶ proposed
a projector particular to LMTO basis set, for which causality was not proven.


III. DFT+DMFT FORMALISM

To derive the DFT+DMFT equations, we define a functional of the correlated Green’s function  (r,
r′) and extremise it. The correlated Green’s function  (r, r′) is defined by Eq. (4), and the
functional to be extremise is

R is the the partial waves or pseudo-atomic wave func-
tion. While this method is clearly causal, it looses spec-tral weight of the correlated angular
momentum charac-ter. Moreover, the implementation of the method did not allow the self-consistent
evaluation of the electronic charge. The method of Anisimov et.al.²⁸ also proposed a
Γ[G, ρ] = −Tr ln(G—¹) − Tr[ΣᵗᵒᵗG] + Φ[G, ρ],  (24)

where Tr runs over all space (orbitals,momenta) and time (frequency). The quantities apprearing in
the above func-tional are




G—¹(r, r′) = iω + µ + ∇2 − Vₑₓt(r) δ(r − r′) − Σᵗᵒᵗ(r, r′)                   (25) Σᵗᵒᵗ(r, r′) = [VH
(r) + Vₓc(r)] δ(r − r′) + [Σω(r, r′) − EDCδ(r − r′)] Θ(r < S)         (26) Φ[G, ρ] = ΦH [ρ] +
Φₓc[ρ] + ΦDMF T [G] − ΦDC[G]                         (27)
ρ = T˜r[G]



where Tr is trace over time only (not space), Vₑₓt is the potentials due to ions, VH, VXC are the
Hartree, and exchange-correlation potential, respectively. ΦDMF T [ ] is the sum of all local two
particle irreducible skeleton di-agrams constructed from G, and the Coulomb repulsion
Uˆ (screened by orbitals not contained in  ), and ΦDC is the double counting functional.
We assume that the Coulomb interaction Uˆ has the same form as in the atom, i.e.,



ˆ Σ  Σ 4πF






however, the Slater integrals are reduced due to screening effects. Typically, we renormalize F ²
F ⁶ by 30%, from their atomic values, while F ⁰, being renormalized more, can be estimate by
constraint LDA or constraint RPA⁴¹.
To extremize the functional Eq. (24), we take  and ρ as independent variables, and use the
following functional dependence: Σ[G], ΦDMF T [G], EDC[G], ΦDC[G] are func-
i.e., G[Σ[ ]]. On the other hand, VH [ρ], Vₓc[ρ], ΦH [ρ], Φₓc[ρ] are functionals of the total
electron density, hence G is also a functional of ρ since G[VH [ρ] +Vₓc[ρ]]. Finally it is easy to
check that



tot

tionals of G. Consequently, G is also a functional of G,
Tr[Σ  G] = Tr[(VH + Vₓc)ρ] + Tr[(Σ − EDC)G].



With the above functional dependence in mind, mini-mization with respect to G gives
7

To sum up all local diagrams, constructed from  and screened Coulomb interaction Uˆ, we solve an
auxiliary


Σ − EDC =
δΦDMF T [G]
δG
δΦDC[G] ,
δG
quantum impurity problem, which has  = Gimp as the impurity green’s function, and Σ as the impurity
self-energy Σimp = Σ. The impurity Green’s function is

and minimization with respect to ρ leads to
Gimp = 1/(iω  Eimp  Σimp  ∆), hence the DMFT self-consistency condition reads
δΦH [ρ]  δΦₓc[ρ]
V  + V  =     +     .
H   ˣᶜ   δρ    δρ


Hence the Hartree and exchange-correlation potential are computed in the same way as in DFT method
(note how-ever ρ is electron density in the presence of DMFT self-energy), while the DMFT
self-energy is the sum of all lo-cal Feynman diagrams, constructed from  and Coulomb interaction
Uˆ.

Pˆ(iω + µ−HDF T − EˆΣ))—¹ = (iω −Eimp − Σimp − ∆)—¹.

where Σ   Σ  EDC, and EDC is the interaction in-cluded in DFT (double counting). The
self-consistency condition takes the explicit form



∫    drdr′P (rr′, τ LL′) ( iω + µ + ∇2 − V  (r) δ(r − r′) − Σ P (r′r, τ L L )Στ  )—1

(r,r')<Sτ
KS
L L ∈H
1 2  L2L1

= h iω − Eτ
− Στ − ∆τ —1i


LL'
(30)



where VKS = Vₑₓt + VH + Vₓc and S is the muffin-tin radius.
For efficient evaluation of the DMFT self-consistency condition Eq. (30), we choose to work in the
Kohn-Sham (KS) basis. At each DFT+DMFT iteration, we first solve the KS-eigenvalue problem
 −∇2 + VKS(r) ψki(r) = ϵkiψki.    (31)
We note in passing that the self-energy Σ(ω) is a complex function, and its imaginary part is
related to the electron-electron scattering rate, which is very large in correlated materials. In
Mott insulators, it is even diverging.  Hence the DMFT ”effective Hamiltonian” ϵk +Σk(ω) can not be
diagonalized by standard methods to obatin a set of eigenvalues, i.e., bands. The eigen-values are
complex and hence only the spectral weight A(k, ω) = (G†k(ω) − Gk(ω)/(2πi) is a well defined quan-

Then we express the projection P  in KS basis,
tity. The absence of well defined bands in correlated ma-

Pk(ij, τ LL′), where i, j run over all bands. We then per-form the embedding of the self-energy,
i.e., transforming it from DMFT base to the KS base
terials makes computational techniques more challeng-ing. For example, the calculation of the
chemical poten-tial is far more demanding because one can not assign a unity of charge to each
fully occupied band. Rather
Σ  (ω) = Σ P  (ji, τ L L ) Στ   (ω)   (32)

k,ij
kτ
τ,L1L2
2 1  L1L2
all complex eigenvalues, even those which are far from
the Fermi level, need to be carefully considered. This point will be addressed below in section IV,
item 5. Fur-

In KS-base, we can invert the Green’s function Eq. (30),
to obtain the practical form of the self-consistency con-dition
ther, the tetrahedron method⁴⁴, a very useful technique to reduce the number of necessary momentum
points in practical calculation, is not applicable since it needs real


GLL'

=  Pkτ
kij
(ij, LL′) h iω + µ − ϵk
− Σk
(ω) —1(33)
ji
eigenvalues. We address the necessary generalization of this method is chapter V.


G ' =
"        1        #

(34)
Note that generalization of the projector and the LDA+DMFT  formalism  to  cluster-DMFT  is  very

iω − Eτ
− Στ (ω) − ∆τ (ω)
LL'
straightforward. One needs to increase the unit cell to in-clude more sites of the same atom type.
The self-energy

This is of course equivalent to Eq. (30). Finally we solve this self-consistency equation for a
given self-energy Σ(ω) to obtain the hybridization function ∆τ and the impurity levels Eτ .
and the Green’s function become matrices in index τ , i.e., Σττ' , ττ' . The transformation Pˆ is
also straight-forwardly generalized to matrix form Pk(ij; τ Lτ′L′). The only difference in the
definition of the projector Eq. (21)





'
is that  ' is replaced by  (  remains unchanged),
which amounts to the integral over two different spheres around two atoms of the same type.
Finally, in cluster-DMFT case, the self-energy in KS-basis Eq. (32) has to be summed over both τ
and τ′, and self-consistency condition Eq. (34) becomes a matrix equation in τ, τ′. The challenging
part of the cluster-DMFT formalism is in solving the cluster-impurity problem. In combination with
impurity solvers based on the hybridization expan-sion (discussed below) the computational effort
grows ex-ponentially with the number of correlated sites. In the weak coupling impurity solvers,
the computational effort grows as a power-law, however, these techniques usually can not reach the
interesting regime of strong correlations and low temperatures.
The major bottleneck in evaluating the DMFT self-consistency condition in our method is the
multiplication of the projector Pkτ (ij, LL′) with Σ in Eq. (32) and mul-tiplication of projection
with Green’s function Gk,ji in Eq. (33). Since projection P ² is separable, one can write the
operation in terms of matrix products. Still, these sums run over all k-points (typically few
thousands) and all frequency points (typically few hundreds).
For the efficient implementation of the set of Eqs. (32) and (33), we first notice that the
transformation P (or its separable part U ) is very large and is not desirable to be written to the
computer hard disc. Hence we generate it only for one k-point at a time, and evaluate both
prod-ucts at this particular k-point. Non-negligible amount of time is necessary to generate the
transformation Eq. (21), and because this transformation does not depend on fre-quency, it needs to
be used for all frequencies in Eqs. (32) and (33). Hence paralization over frequency is not
im-plemented, while paralization over k-points is.
Note that because of the sum over atoms (τ ) in Eq. (32), the transformation for all atoms needs to
be computed first, and only then the sum in Eq. (32) can be evaluated and the self-consistency
condition Eq. (34) can be inverted.
To optimize the sum in Eqs. (32) and (33), one can no-tice that local quantities like self-energy
and local green’s function possess a large degree of symmetry when written in proper basis (real
harmonics, relativistic harmonics): many off-diagonal matrix elements vanish, and many ma-trix
elements are equivalent. For example, in a d sys-tem with cubic symmetry, one has only two types of
self-energy t₂g and eg. Hence, instead of summing over 10 10 matrix elements in Eq. (32), one can
rewrite the sum over two matrix elements t = (0, 1), i.e.,
Σk,ij(ω) = Σ Σ⁽τ⁾(ω)Pkτ (ji, t)     (35)
8

IV. THE ALGORITHM

The implementation of the DFT+DMFT algorithm is done in the following few steps:
1) ρ(r): We converge the LDA/GGA equations to get the starting electronic charge ρ(r). We use the
non-spin polarized solution as starting point.  In the ordered state, the DMFT self-energy is
allowed to break the symmetry, while typically the exchange-correlation potential is not allowed to
break the symmetry (LDA rather than LSDA).
In this preparation step we also obtain good esti-mates for the Coulomb repulsion U (which is
rep-resented by Slater integrals F ⁰, F ², F ⁴ and F ⁶). Slater integrals are computed by the
atomic physics program of Ref. 42, and they are scaled down by 30% to account for the screening in
the solid. The F ⁰ terms is very different from the atomic F ⁰ and is obtained by constraint LDA
calculation, or con-straint RPA calculation⁴¹.
2) ψki(r): We solve the DFT KS-eigenvalue problem (−∇2 + VKS(r))ψki(r) = ψki(r)εDF T
to obtaine KS eigenvectors, core, and semicore charge, and linearization energies Eν.
3) ΣLL' : We start with a guess for the lattice self-energy correction Σ(ω) = Σ(ω) + Σ∞ − Edc (here
Σ is the dynamic part of the self-energy with the

is Σ(ω) = 0 and Edc = Σ∞ . The potential in the first DMFT iteration is thus the DFT potential.
4) Σk,ij:  Next we embed the DMFT self-energy
(τ )
ΣLL' (ω) (shifted by double counting) to Kohn-
Sham base by the transformation Eq. (32) to obtain Σk,ij(ω).
5) µ: Using the current DMFT self-energy Σ(ω), and the current DFT KS-potential VKS, we compute the
current chemical potential. This is done in the followin steps:
– Complex eigenvalues εkl(ω) of the full Green’s function are found in the large enough energy
interval (at least [−2U ,2U ]) by solving
Σ


where P
(ji, t) = Σ
τ,t

P (ji, L L ) and the
ki  ij
j
kij   jl
il  kl

indices L₁, L₂ here stand for the real harmonics rather than spheric harmonics. The later
transformation is in-dependent of frequency, while the sum Eq. (35) needs to be performed for all
frequencies, hence the compact form of the transformation saves a lot of computer time.
Here Cji are DMFT eigenvectors expressed in KS base. The DMFT eigenvalues outside this interval are
set to DFT eigenvalues. We need only eigenvalues in this step, but not eigenvec-tors.

9


– The chemical potential is determined using precomputed complex and frequency depen-dent
eigenvalues εkl,ω. On imaginary axis we solve
– Next, we neglected broadening of the pole (ΓL), which should be small in the Mott in-sulating
state. We computed a quasiparticle approximation for the Green’s function Gqᵖ,


Nvₐl = T
kl,ω
1
iωn + µ − εkl(iωn)
i.e.,

(Gqᵖ)—¹ = iω−εDF T −Σ

−U √W

  1   √W


U kτ∗

n                           k  ij
ki    ∞,ij  iL
L iω − PL
L jL

and on real axis we solve
(37)
where  U ᵏτ  is  part  of  the  projector

1  Σ ∫  ƒ (ω)dω
iL
k         kτ
kτ∗

π  kl  ω + µ − εkl(ω)
– The above Green’s function formulae can be cast into a block form

If enough k-points can be afforded, we use
special point method, otherwise the “complex   qp
εDFT + Σ∞ U kτ √W
 —₁

tetrahedron method” can be used (see chap-ter V).
Gk =
iω −
k
WU kτ†   P
≡ (iω − Hk ) .
(38)

For numerical evaluation of the real axis den-
Here Hqᵖ
is the quasiparticle Hamiltonian

sity, we discretize the integral
which can be diagonalized to obtain the quasi-particle bands.  We notice that the num-

1
Nvₐl = −π Im
ƒ (ωi)
Σ ∫ bi
dω
ω + µ − ε

(ω )
ber of quasiparticle bands of the Mott insu-lator is larger then the number of Kohn-Sham

i     kl  ai
kl  i
bands because Mott insulators have at least

with ai  =  (ωi + ωi—₁)/2 and bi  = (ωi₊₁ + ωi)/2. When using the special point method, the
integral over frequency is evalu-ated analytically, and the terms of the form log(ai + µ − εkl(ωi))
are summed up. Alter-
two Hubbard bands. The quasiparticle bands are not very accurate away from the Fermi level, however
they are sufficiently acurate at low energy and allow one to identify gaps at the Fermi level.
Once a gap in the spectra

atively, we sometimes use the complex tetra-
of Hqᵖ is identified, the charge is computed

hedron method, where the four-dimensional integral is evaluated analytically (see chap-ter V)
When DMFT is done on imaginary axis (using imaginary time impurity solvers), we evaluate

kl − µ) +
kl
using the full DMFT density matrix to verify
the neutrality of the solid. If the solid is neu-tral when chemical potential is in the gap, the
chemical potential is set to the middle of the gap.
6) ∆: Impurity hybridization function ∆(ω) and im-purity levels Eimp are computed in this step.
(τ )

2T  Σ
Σ[      1      −     1     ]

We use equation (33) to get GLL' and we use the
1     εk∞l − µ   1     ε⁰ − µ                   Σ


Here ε⁰ is the real part of the eigenvalue at

arbitrary frequency. We choose the lowest or the last Mastubara point. Again, the tetrahe-dron
method can be used for momentum sum.
For Mott insulators, the above described method is not very efficient, because even a small
numerical error in computing Nvₐl places chemical potential at the edge of the Hubbard band, either
upper or lower. This instability usually does not allow one to reach a stable self-consistent
solution. We devised the following method to remove this instability:
– The diagonal components of the self-energy were fitted by a pole-like expression ΣLL' = Σ +   WL
 .
iω—PL+iΓL
7) Σimp: Impurity solver uses ∆LL' (ω), Eimp, and
Coulomb repulsion U (which is represented by Slater integrals F ⁰, F ², F ⁴ and F ⁶) as the input
and gives the new self-energy ΣLL' (ω) as the out-put.
Currently we integrated the following impurity solvers: OCA (see chapter VII B), Non-crossing
approximation (NCA), Continuous time quantum Monte Carlo (CTQMC)²³.  The latter is imple-mented on
imaginary axis, and the former two on real axis.
Before the impurity solver is run, we exactly diag-onalize the atomic problem in the presence of
crys-tal fields, to obtain all atomic energies Em and the

10


matrix elements of electron creation operator in the atomic basis  m ƒ†α n . Since the impurity
levels can change during the iteration, the crystal field of the atomic problem can change as well.
In case of ƒ -systems, the crystal field splittings are small and one can assume that they do not
change sub-stantially from their DFT value. Hence the exact diagonalization can be done only once
at the be-ginning. For the d-systems, the crystal field split-tings are larger, and this
approximation is in gen-eral not necessary satisfactory, hence the exact di-agonalization needs to
be repeated in the charge self-consistent cycle.  A special care needs to be taken here when using
CTQMC. To speed up the convergence of CTQMC solver, we typically start simulation with the status
of the kink distribution from previous DMFT step. Since exact diagonal-ization can reorder
eigenstates, these kinks need to be properly renumbered, to efficiently restart sim-ulation.
8) Σ∞: It is very hard to achieve reasonably pre-cise self-energy at high frequency with impurity
solvers based on hybridization expansion. How-ever, to correctly compute electronic charge, it is
crucial that the self-energy at high frequency ap-
– density:  n + a₁ = nₑₓₐct, where n = A(x)ƒ (x)dx and nₑₓₐct is the impurity den-sity determined
by the impurity solver in an alternative, more precise way (from pseudo-
particle density).
– Σ∞: m₁ + a₁ϵ₁ + a₂ϵ₂ = Eimp + Σ∞, where m₁ is the first moment m₁ =  xA(x)dx.
Once the following three constrains are satisfied, the self-energy at high frequency approaches its
Hartree-Fock value, and the spectral function re-spects the total impurity density.
9) Σ: Using the new impurity self-energy, we deter-mine the new lattice self-energy Σ(ω) = Σ(ω) +
Σ∞  EDC, where EDC = U (n 1/2) J(n/2 1/2),
with n the correlated nominal occupancy.
10) goto 4 :  If the convergence of charge is hard to achieve, we iterate the DMFT loop a few
times. We call this loop the DMFT loop. If the DMFT loop is to be iterated, jump to 4.
11) µ, ρ(r): The eigevalue problem is solved for all mo-mentum and frequency points,
Σ[εDFT δij + Σkij (ω)]Cω,R = Cω,Rεklω.

proaches its Hartree-Fock value and the impurity        ᵏⁱ j
Green’s function and self-energy at large frequency
kjl
kil

properly behave. Hence we correct Σ∞ at each it-eration. This is quite straighforward, given the
fact that impurity solvers determine the impurity den-sity very precisely. This steps only corrects
the high
Here we evaluate both, eigenvalues and eigenvec-tors. Since this is a non-hermitian eigenvalue
prob-lem, the left and right eigenvectors are not complex conjugates of each other. We use notation
CωR for

energy tails of the impurity green’s function and
impurity self-energy, while we make sure that the low energy part, which is computed very precisely
by these methods, is not altered.
In the case of CTQMC solver, we compute the atomic Green’s function using CTQMC probabil-ities for
each atomic state (see Ref. 23 for details). The high-frequency tails of the self-energy can then
be computed. These analytic tails are then used in-stead of noisy QMC data.
In OCA and NCA impurity solvers, we project out very high excited atomic states. This has
negligible
the right and CωL for the left eigenvector.
Using the DMFT eigenvalues, we recompute the chemical potential as in 5.
We then recompute the electronic charge from the DMFT eigenvectors
ω
kil
i
where ψki are Kohn-Sham eigenvectors (solutions of the LDA eigenvalue problem). The electronic
valence charge on real axis is

effect on the low energy physics, however, it results


1  Σ ∫ R



ƒ (ω)dω  L




deficiency, we add two lorentzians to the impurity
Green’s function
and on imaginary axis is

∫ A(x)dx   a₁    a₂
ρ  (r) = T Σ ψR  (r)     1     ψL  (r).



typically with ϵ₁ < U and ϵ₂ > U . Here we omit-
ted the subscript LL′ for the impurity Green’s func-tion LL' for clarity. The parameters a₁, a₂,
ϵ₁, ϵ₂ are determined by the following constraints:
– normalization: m₀ + a₁ + a₂ = 1, where m₀ is the integral of A(x).
We compute the electronic charge using similar technique as used above to compute the chemical
potential. The electronic charge is
ρvₐl(r) =  ψki(r)ψk∗j (r)WDMF T .
kij

11


The weights WDMF T on real axis are combuted as
and evaluated by

WDMFT = Σ CωpRCωpLwklp


Σ DFT



DMFT  ∫

with
1
∫ bp   1
imp
potential
− ΦDC

wklp = −π
ƒ (ωp)Im
dω
ap   ω + µ − εklωp
where WDMF T
fined above, and
is the DMFT density matrix de-

and ap = (ωp + ωp—₁)/2, bp = (ωp₊₁ + ωp)/2.
On imaginary axis we evaluate the weights by the following expression

imp potential
= 1 T
2 ω ,τ LL'

(τ )
LL'

n)G⁽τ⁾ (ωn

)  (39)
Σ  CωnRCωnL     Cω0 Cω0∗  !

k,ij

ωn,l
iωn + µ − εklωn
iωn + µ − εklω0
puted very precisely by most impurity solvers, such as CTQMC or OCA. For example, in CTQMC we

+ Σ Cω0 Cω0∗ ƒ (εklω
− µ)
sample probability for each atomis state P
. Us-
Σ P Eatom − Σ  Eimpnimp.

a hermitian matrix in Kohn-Sham band indeces i and j. Hence, we can use eigenvalue techniques for
hermitian matrices to decompose W into
WDMFT = Σ Uk,ilwk,lU∗ .
13) mix : The total electronic charge is mixed with the charge from previous iterations using
multi-secant mixing of Marks and Luke⁴³.

k,ij
l
k,jl
14) DFT : In this step, we recompute the DFT poten-tial (hartree, exchange-correlation potential),
the

The LDA+DMFT electronic charge can then be
evaluated by rotated Kohn-Sham vectors, and DMFT weights wk,l by
Kohn-Sham orbitals and linearization energies.
15) goto 11 : If the self consistency is hard to achieve,


ρ  (r) =
Σ "Σ U
ψ (r)# w
Σ ψ∗ (r)U∗  .
jump to 11 and determine the best electronic charge ρ(r) on the current impurity self-energy Σ. We
call

val

k,l
k,il ki
i
k,l    kj
j
k,jl
this loop the LDA loop.

Hence, the code to compute the LDA charge can be simply converted to compute the DMFT charge by
just replacing the Kohn-Sham LDA weight by DMFT weight wk,l, and by rotating the Kohn-Sham
eigenvectors by the above computed eigen-vectors Uk.
Finally, the DFT core and DFT semicore charge is added to the valence charge, and the resulting
total charge is renormalized in the standard way, such that the charge neutrality is satisfied to
high accuracy.
12) Etₒt:The total energy is computed on the output density ρ(r), using the low temperature limit
of the functional Eq. (24) evaluated on the DFT+DMFT solution:
16) goto 6 If the electronic charge and self-energy are not converged, jump to 6. We call this loop
the charge loop.


V. COMPLEX TETRAHEDRON METHOD

The calculation of the electronic density, as well as the correlated Green’s function, requires
precise eval-uation of integrals, which contain diverging poles. In systems with many atoms per
unit cell, one can not af-ford enough k-points to get hybridization function ∆(ω) smooth on a scale
of temperature T without introduc-ing artifical broadening larger than T . Hence, to avoid
artifical broadening larger than the low energy scale, we need to use alternative summation over
momentum. The

Etₒtₐl = Tr[(−∇
1
+Vₑₓt)G] + 2 Tr[ΣG] +EH +Eₓc −ΦDC
tetrahedron method⁴⁴ is used in this case.  In the con-text of DFT+DMFT, an aditional complication
is that

For computation, the formula is cast into the fol-lowing form
Etₒtₐl = Tr[(−∇2 + VKS)G] − ∫ (VH (r) + Vₓc(r))ρ(r)dr
1
+ EH + Eₓc + 2 Tr[ΣG] − ΦDC
the eigenvalues are complex numbers. Although the ana-
lytic formulas for the integration over a tetrahedron can straighforwardly be evaluated, and are
given in appendix A, a more severe problem is the interpolation of the mul-tidimensional complex
functions ϵik in momentum space. Below we give details on a method to overcome this dif-ficulty.

12


Computation of the Green’s function requires the eval-uation of the following integral
g = Σ  Cik   ,
function can become non-causal in such points. Due to this non-adequate interpolation, the Green’s
function has a lot of noise, superimposed on a smooth curve. How-ever, hybridization function,
which is many times more

k
which can be rewriten as
ω − ϵikω
sensitive than the Green’s function, has unbearable large error, which cause enormous error in the
solution of the impurity problem.

Σ ∫ 3



Cik



To overcome this problem, we implemented a special



where the sum runs over all tetrahedrons t, and integral needs to be performed over the particular
tetrahedron
one k-point to its neighboring k-point. For each tetrahe-
dron, we minimize the following functional

t. i is the band index. The linear interpolation of Cik and linear interpolation of ϵikω in
momentum space leads to analytic formulas for the weight functions w(i, k, ω) (given in appendix
A), which can be used to evaluate g
Σi (α,βΣ)∈pairs
|ϵi,kα
− ϵi,kβ
| = min    (41)

to higher precision by g =  k w(i, k, ω)Cik. Similarly, the electron density is computed by
where the 6 pairs of the tetrahedron corners are:
(1, 2), (1, 3)  (3, 4), and i runs over all bands. We min-imize the functional with respect to the
order of eigen-

Nval
=     dωƒ (ω)  .
ik   ω + µ − ϵikω
values in all corners of the tetrahedra.
To minimize the above functional, we can choose an arbitrary order of bands in the first k-point
k₁, and then

We take a frequency mesh, which is sufficiently dense at zero freqeuncy that it can resolve the
fermi function ƒ (ω), and we approximate
we have to permute the components of the other three k-points (k₂,k₃,k₄). Hence the number of all
possible trial steps is (n!)³, where n is the number of bands, and is typically of the order of few
hundred.  Obviously, not

1
Nvₐl = −π Im
tΣ,i,j
ƒ (ωj)
t
d³k
(ωj+1+ωj )/2

(ωj +ωj−1)/2
dω
ω + µ − ϵikω
all arrangements of the eigenvalues can be tried. Our algorithm for sorting the eigenvalues is

= − 1 Im Σ ƒ (ω )wi (k, ωj+1 + ωj , ωj + ωj—1 )(40)



1 Sort the eigenvalues according to their real parts.



Here the integral t is the integral over a particular tetra-hedron t. The weights can again be
computed analyti-
cally and are give in Appendix A.
To evaluate the integral over a tetrahedron t, which has corners in momentum points k₁, k₂, k₃, k₄,
we need to interpolate the eigenvalues ϵi1k1 , ϵi2k2 , ϵi3k3 , ϵi4k4 inside the volume of the
tetrahedron.  Since there are many crossing bands (index i), it is not at all simple to find a good
interpolation of ϵik inside the tetrahedron.
In the standard tetrahedron method, where eigen-values are real numbers, one sorts the eigenvalues
at each k-point, to get the vector of increasing energies ϵ₁,k, ϵ₂,k, · · · , and then one linearly
interpolates each sorted component of the vector ϵi,k1 , ϵi,k2 , ϵi,k3 , ϵi,k4 in-side the
tetrahedron. Hence all crossings are avoided. It is however important that no artifical crossings
are ob-tained in the interpolation, because a crossing gives a diverging contribution to the
integral.
Complex eigenvalues, which appear in DFT+DMFT, can not be sorted. Hence the interpolation is not at
all
to flip components of a vectors ϵk,i   ϵk,j. Try
to flip components in any of the momentum points k₂, · · · , k₄.
The trial steps are chosen in such a way that the probabil-ity for flipping two eigenvalues, which
have very different real parts, is very small. We typically choose an expo-nential distribution
function with probability P (|i−j|) ∝ exp(|i − j|/5).


VI. TRANSPORT CALCULATION USING DFT+DMFT

In this section, we will give the efficient algorithm to compute the DC conductivity within
DFT+DMFT. The higher order transport coefficients can be computed along the similar lines, although
the computation be-comes more technically involved.
The DC-conductivity can in general be expressed by

simple. A reasonable attempt would be to sort eigen-
values according to their real parts, and just neglect
σµν = lim
1 ''
χµν
(ω + iδ)       (42)

their imaginary parts when sorting. It turns out that in strongly correlated regime, where the
self-energy be-comes very large at some frequency points, the error in tetrahedron method is so
large that the hybridization
ω→0 ω
where the current-current correlation function χ is ex-pressed diagrammatically through the
electron Green’s functions and the current vertex function by

13


χ  (iω ) = −T   Σ   vᵏµ Gᵖ1' p1 (iν )Gᵖ2p2' (iν  − iω )Γσν (kν , ω ).        (43)

µν  n

kσνm,p1,p2,p' ,p'
p1p2  kσ   m  k
m   n  ' '   m  n
2 1
1 2
Here Γ(kνm, ωn) is the current vertex function, which satisfies the integral equation
Γσν (kν , ω ) = vᵏν  − T   Σ   Iσσ'   (kν , k′ν′ ; ω )Gᵖ4p' (iν′ )Gᵖ' p3 (iν′ − iω )Γσ'ν (k′ν′ , ω
)(44)





and I(kνm, k′νm′ ; ωn) is the particle hole irreducible ver-tex, whose limit at zero frequency and
Fermi momenta is the Landau interaction function. vᵏν are velocities, given by
vᵏν =  ie ψ
Dynamical Mean Field Theory the self-energy operator is approximated by a purely local quantity.
However, the local approximation is made in a localized basis.  The self-energy in the Kohn-Sham
basis is given by Eq. (32), and is obviously momentum dependent. In general case,
the resulting self-energy εk+Pˆkτ Σ is not an even function

p1p2
− 2m⟨
kp1 |∇ν|ψkp2 ⟩.
of momentum, and hence G—k
/= Gk.

All quantities are expressed in a Bloch-basis, for example the Kohn-Sham basis, which diagonalizes
the static part of the action.
In general, the two particle vertex function is very dif-ficult to compute. In some cases, the
vertex corrections vanish and the transport quantities can be computed from the lowest order bubble
diagram.
If self-energy is momentum independent, and the single band approximation is appropriate, the
vertex correction vanish, as shown by Khurana⁴⁵. In multiband system, the following set of
conditions are sufficient for the vertex correction to vanish:
1) The  irreducible  vertex  function  is  local,  i.e., I(kν, k′ν′; ωn) does not depend on k or
k′.
2) Velocities are odd functions of momentum, i.e.,
Due to difficulties in computing the two particle vertex function to high accuracy on real axis,
the vast majority of theoretical calculations ignore the vertex corrections to conductivity. At
present it is not clear how impor-tant the vertex corrections to optical conductivity and transport
are in correlated electron materials. They are likely small because they vanish at low energy,
where an effective single band approximation is possible. And they are also small at intermediate
energies where the interband transitions give major contribution to optical conductivity. However,
a thorough investigation of the vertex corrections and consequently appearance of exci-tons in
correlated materials is a very interesting avenue for future research.
In the absence of vertex corrections, the current-current corelation function Eq. (43) becomes

v—k
= −v
2
Imχµν(ω) =  ⁰
V₀
dy[ƒ (y − ω) − ƒ (y)] ×
3) Green’s function is even functions of momentum,             ᵏ

i.e., G—k = Gk.
Tr ρk(y)vᵏµρk(y − ω)vᵏν  (45)

Under the above conditions, it is clear from Eq. (44) that only the zeroth order term remains and
vertex is un-renormalized Γ(k) = vᵏ. Consider the first order term
Σk' I Gk' Gk' vᵏ in Eq. (44) or the second order term
where ρk = (G†  G)/(2πi). Both spectral density ρk and velocity vk are matrices in orbital indices
and trace is taken over the orbitals and spins in Eq. (45). Finally, the real part of the DC
conductivity is given by

Σk'k'' I Gk' Gk' I Gk'' Gk'' v
k''
in Eq. (44). The func-

′µν
πe² Σ ∫   dƒ

kµ    kν

tion being summed is odd in k′ and k′′, respectively, and hence the terms vanish.
σ  =      dy
V₀
k
−dy
Tr ρk(y)v
ρk(y)v
(.46)

Under which circumstances the above three conditions are met? The first condition is exact in the
limit of infi-nite dimensions. Thus in Dynamical Mean Field Theory, the irreducible vertex is
local. For many three dimen-sional systems, it is believed to be an excellent approx-imation.
However, the velocities are not necessary odd functions of momentum, in particular, they are
obviously nonzero in strict atomic limit, thus violating the condi-tion (2). Finally, the third
condition is obviously satis-fied in single band theories with local self-energy, where Gk(ω) =
1/(ω + µ − ϵk − Σ(ω)) because ϵ—k = ϵk. In
The dynamic self-energy is computed by an impurity solver, which is implemented either on the real
or imag-inary axis. The most precise impurity solvers, such as CTQMC, are implemented on imaginary
axis, hence we would like to formulate the method also for the case of imaginary axis self-energy.
Since the DC transport is sensitive to the behaviour of the self-energy at low fre-quency, we take
the power expansion for Σ(iω) and we determine the coefficients directly on imaginary axis
Σ(ω) = Σ(0) + (1 − Z—¹)ω − iω²B + · · · .   (47)

14


For the DC conductivity, the expansion to the quadratic order is quite accurate. However, for the
thermoelectric power, the truncation at quadratic order is not sufficient
of the following functions
P (z) = ∫ dx − dƒ  1


(59)

1
since the qubic terms in the self-energy expansion (the
asymmetry of the scattering rate) is crucial even at low
dx x  z
∫    dƒ   1

temperature (see Ref.⁴⁶).
P₂(z, γ) =
dx −dx
|x − z + ix2γ|2  (60)

We first embed the quasiparticle renormalization am-


∫    dƒ   1



Then we can express the low energy electron Green’s
function in the Kohn-Sham basis as

Gk(ω) = (ωZ—¹ + µ − Σ(0) − εk + iω²Bk)—¹  (48)
If p = q, we have
ᵏ = Q₂(Ekp, Γkp)        (62)
k

k

Here Z and Zk are hermitian matrices, while Σ(0) has both real and imaginary parts and is a complex
non-
Rpp = P₂(Ekp, Γkp)        (63)
and if p /= q we approximate

hermitian matrix.
Next we compute the square root rk ≡

Zk through
k = P₁(Ekp) − P₁(Ekq)
Ekp − Ekq
(64)

the eigensystem of Zk. We thus have
Rk = P₁(Ekp) − P₁(Ekq) .      (65)

Gk(ω) = rk(ω − rk(−µ + Σ(0) + εk − iω²Bk)rk)—¹
rk(49)
Ek∗p
− Ekq

We first solve the non-hermitian eigenvalue problem
Here we neglected the term proportional to x²Γ in the denominator, since the derivative of the
fermi function

[r (ε
− µ + Σ(0))r
] AR = ARE
(50)
constrains |x|  1 and since the interband transition
AL [rk(εk − µ + Σ(0))rk] = EkAL,    (51)    A special care needs to be taken to compute the inte-
k                   k
grals P₁, P₂ and Q₂ to high enough precision and avoid

and compute the scattering rate in the eigenbase

ALrkBkrkAR = Γk.        (52)
divergencies. We give details on their evaluation in Ap-pendix B
k     k


to get


G (ω) = r AR


1  ALr


(53)
VII. IMPURITY SOLVERS BASED ON HYBRIDIZATION EXPANSION

k ω − Ekω ᵏ

Here we used Ekω = Ek  iω²Γk. Next we insert Eq. (53) into (46) and we neglect the off-diagonal
components of the scattering rate ( (Γk)pq  Γkpδp,q), since the scatter-ing between quasiparticles
is subleading at low tempera-ture. We thus obtain
The impurity solvers based on the hybridization ex-pansion have a long history and were often
employed to solve the problem of a degenerate magnetic impurity in a metallic host⁴⁷–⁵³. In the
past, most of calculations were limited to the lowest order self-consistent approximation, called
the Non-crossing approximation (NCA). Recently, many generalization of the approach were
studied²⁵,⁵⁴–⁵⁶, to overcome the difficulty of the NCA at low tempera-

σ′ = −
2
⁰ Re
Σ Ck Sk
− D R
(54)
ture, below the Kondo temperature. It is well known



where
2πV₀
kpq
pq qp
pq qp
that the NCA approximation fails to recover the Fermi liquid fixed point at low temperature and low
energy. Typically there are three types of problems with NCA: i) the Kondo temperature is correct
when only one type of

Cᵏ = (ALrkvµrkAR)qp(ALrkvνrkAR)pq  (55)
charge fluctuations is dominant (like N → N−1, which is

pq     k   k   k
k  k   k
equivalent to the limit of U = ∞). When more than one
Dk  = (ALrkvµrkAL†)qp(AR†rkvνrkAR)pq  (56)   charge fluctuation needs to be considered (N → N + 1
Sk  = ∫ dx − dƒ    1  (57)  and N → N − 1) the Kondo temperature is severely un-

qp        dx
(x − Ekₓp)(x − Ekₓq)
derestimated and hence the Kondo peak is too narrow.

Rᵏ = ∫ dx
− dƒ     1

(58)
ii) The asymmetry of the Kondo-Suhl resonance and its
height is exaggerated in NCA. iii) At very low temper-

qp        dx
(x − Ek∗xp
)(x − Ekₓq)
atures T TK
an additional spurious peak at zero fre-

The integrals Sᵏ and Rᵏ have multiple poles and need to be treated by care. We first rewrite Sᵏ and
Rᵏ in terms
quency appears.
For DMFT applications, the problem iii) is not very severe, while the other two are. The first
problem can

15


be corrected by a very moderate computational expense. Adding the first subleading Feynman
diagrams²⁵,⁵⁴, named One crossing approximation (OCA)⁵,⁵⁴ cures the problem of the low energy
scale. It also substantially im-proves the asymmetry of the Kondo peak as well as its width. Not
surprisingly, in the context of DMFT, the OCA approximation gives correct critical U of the Mott
transition in the Hubbard model, while NCA severely underestimates it. In contrast to other higher
order con-serving approximations²⁵,⁵⁵, the OCA approximation is relatively straighforward to
generalized to the arbitrary impurity problem. Due its attractive features, OCA was used in many
DMFT applications, such as unraveling the mixed valence state in Pu⁵⁷, the coherence-incoherence
crossover in Ce-115 materials⁵⁸, the transport properties in titanides¹⁵, the α to γ transition in
Ce, etc. Com-pared to exact solution, as obtained by CTQMC, the OCA approximations typically gives
very precise proba-bility for all atomic states⁵⁹ (the histogram), quite pre-cise coherence scale,
and the quasiparticle renormaliza-tion amplitude (the width of the Kondo peak), which is typically
only slightly underestimated. At temperatures below the coherence scale, the OCA method, however,
still suffers from slight overestimation of the height of the Kondo peak, and hence causality
violation in the context of DMFT. Hence, the OCA approximation has to be used with care, especially
in the systems with high coherence scale, and the systems with only moderate correlations.
The OCA equations for the one band problem were
given by many authors²⁵,⁵⁴, and their generalization to
Ref. 59 and Ref. 60). On the other hand, the OCA im-purity solver is very accurate in many
correlated systems with narrow bands. For example, it gives correct criti-cal U in Hubbard model,
correct Kondo scale in Kondo lattice model, etc.
The current implementation of CTQMC is equivalent to pseudoparticle formulation of the expansion
around the atomic limit, however, with bare pseudoparticle prop-agators. It is thus natural to
expect that the dressed pseudoparticle propagators would make the algorithm more efficient, since
the two kinks approximation is equivalent to NCA, and the four kinks approximation to OCA.
The basic idea of the bold CTQMC algorithm is to sample the skeleton Feynman diagrams, with
propaga-tors being dressed ⁶¹. The Monte Carlo importance sam-pling samples all such diagrams, with
the probability pro-portional to their Luttinger-Ward functional Φ.  Hence contributions to all
pseudoparticle self-energies can be straighforwardly sampled within this approach.
Although the formalism of hybridization expansion on real axis was developed long ago (see for
example Ref.62), its imaginary axis counterpart was not yet given. To our knowledge, the NCA
equations have not yet been implemented on imaginary axis, because of the problems with diverging
term in the projected Dyson equation (see Eq. (79) below).
In the hybridization expansion, the pseudoparticles are introduced to diagonalize the atomic part
of the Hamil-tonian. The impurity problem is cast into the form

multiband situation was briefly discussed in the review
Ref. 5, the generalized equations were however, not yet given, hence we will give them for the
general multiorbital
H =  |m⟩Em
m
⟨m| +  ε
ki
kic†kicki
(66)

impurity problem, as relevant in the electronic structure calculations in section VII B.
Recently, a renewed interest in the hybridization ex-
+
mn,kαi
Vkiα|m⟩⟨m|ƒα† |n⟩⟨n|cki + h.c.

pansion arouse, once it was shown²¹,²² that the Feynman diagrams can be efficiently sampled by
Monte Carlo im-portance sampling. The current implementation of this algorithm, as applied to
realistic material problems, was discussed in plenty of detail recently²³,²⁴, and it will not be
repeated here.
Here we will rather outline an alternative Monte Carlo sampling approach, which was not yet
discussed in the
where we used completeness  m m m = 1 for atomic
states m . Each atomic state is represented by corre-
sponding pseudoparticle a†m vacuum  = m , and the completness of atomic basis gives a constraint
for pseu-doparticles    m a†mam  Q = 1. The Hamiltonian is then given by
H = Σ Ema†mam + Σ εkic†kicki        (67)

literature nor implemented. It is natural to ask if there exists an alternative regrouping of
diagrams in Monte Carlo sampling, such that NCA approximation would be
m
+
mn,kαi

Vkiα

a†man
ki
⟨m|ƒα† |n⟩cki
+ h.c. + λ(Q − 1)

the lowest order contribution in the hybridization expan-sion, i.e., the two kinks approximation.
We detail the method below in section VII A, and show results of a


and the action is
S = Σ ∫ dτa† ( ∂ + E



+ λ)a


(68)

at a finite order (up to fifth order in hybridization).
+
nn'mm'
(Fα†)mn
(F )n'm' ×


A. Towards Bold-CTQMC

The CTQMC²¹,²³ solver is the most efficient exact solver for electronic structure problems (see for
example
× ∫ dτdτ′a†m(τ )an(τ )∆αβ(τ − τ′)a†n' (τ′)am' (τ′) where (Fα†)mn = ⟨m|ƒα† |n⟩. We also define H =
H₀ +

16


Any physical quantity has to be evaluated in the Q = 1 subspace. This is achieved by letting λ   ,
to separate the spectra of Q = 0, Q = 1, Q = 2,  . Then we use the Abrikosov’s trick to pick out
the Q = 1 subspace.
''
Hence G(τ < 0) vanishes because ƒ (x)Gm(x) vanishes.
We thus have

Gm(τ < 0) = 0               (75)

The expectation value, which we want to compute is
TrQ=1(Ae—βH )
G (τ > 0) = e—λτ  dxe—ˣτ m            π

''
Gm(x + λ).
(76)

⟨A⟩Q₌₁ =
TrQ=1
,     (69)
(e—βH )
This equations demonstrate the well known fact that the pseudoparticles can not propagate back in
time.

while accesible quantities are ⟨A⟩ =  Q TrQ(Ae—βH )/Z.
If operator A vanishes in the absence of impurity (in Q = 0 subspace), the physical expectation
value can be computed by
To derive a set of well posed projected equations, we introduce projected Green’s functions, which
remain well behaved in the limit λ   , and are used for numeric implementation


⟨A⟩


Q=1

= lim
⟨A⟩ .       (70)
G˜m

(τ ) = eλτ Gm

(τ )        (77)


This is clear from expansion
λ→∞ ⟨Q⟩

Of course, these projected propagators vanish for τ <
0. The projected propagators are analogous to the well

Z⟨A⟩ = TrQ₌₁(Ae—βH0—βλ) + TrQ₌₂(Ae—βH0—2βλ) + · · ·
Z⟨Q⟩ = TrQ₌₁(e—βH0—βλ) + TrQ₌₂(2e—βH0—2βλ) + · · ·
Z = TrQ₌₀(e—βH0 ) + · · ·        (71)
Notice also that in the λ → ∞ limit
known projected functions on the real axis (see Ref. 62)
''
Gm(x) = Gm(x + λ)/ƒ (−x) since

m(τ ) =   e—ωτ ƒ (−ω)Gm(ω)    (78)


⟨Q⟩e  =
TrQ=1(e—βH0 ) TrQ=0(e—βH0 )

= e—βF

imp    (72)
is the usual τ  ω transformation between the imaginary time and real frequency.
Our goal is to write all equations in terms of projected

can be used to obtain impurity free energy.
In more general case, when ⟨A⟩ does not vanish in Q = 0 subspace, Eq. (70) should be replace by
⟨A⟩Q₌₁ = lim   (AQ⟩ .
(Q⟩
The Green’s functions for pseudoparticles obey the
Dyson equation,
G and analogous Σ functions, which do not contain λ and are numerically well behaved. The problem
however is that the projected quantities do not have fermionic nor bosonic character, and hence can
not be represented on imaginary frequency axis. The Dyson equation Eq. (73) can be expressed in
terms of projected functions by

1
Gm = ω − λ − E

− Σm

.     (73)
(ω)
G˜(τ ) = T
Σiω
e—(iω—λ)τ
iω − λ − E − ∫ β dτ′e(iω—λ)τ' Σ˜(τ ′)

(79)

where the energies of all pseudoparticles are shifted by λ compared to atomic energies Em, due to
λQ term in the Hamiltonian. In general, the Green’s functions for pseudoparticles are off-diagonal.
The states which corre-spond to the same superstate, defined in Ref. 23, obey a matrix analog of
the above Dyson equation. However, here we will give equations for diagonal case, since the
generalization is less transparent, but straighforward.
The numeric limit of λ     is very untractable for computer. Since bold-CTQMC is implemented in
imagi-nary time, we thus want to analytically project the pseu-
doparticle equations on imaginary time axis.
but its evaluation is far from straightforward. For conve-nience, we drop the index m from Em, Gm,
and Σm.
We need to evaluate this formula in the limit λ   . It is however not possible to perform the limit
numer-ically because the exponential factors grow as exp(λβ) while the poles are in infinity on the
real axis.
For the implementation of the bold-CTQMC, it is cru-cial to find numerically tractable form of the
projected Dyson equation. To this end, we perform expansion in powers of Σ˜, to get

Before the limit λ    is taken, the pseudoparticle Green’s functions are given by
G˜(τ ) = T
Σiω
e—(iω—λ)τ iω − λ − E
S
1 +
iω − λ − E


Gm(τ ) =
 ∫ dxƒ (−x)e—ˣτ

''
Gm(x) τ > 0

.  (74)
S2
+(iω − λ − E)2 + · · ·
(80)
The poles of the Green’s function Gm are at large fre-  where S = ∫ β dτ′e⁽ⁱω—λ⁾τ' Σ˜(τ ′). The
summation over
''

quencies, comparable to λ, while Gm vanishes for x λ.
imaginary frequency can now be performed, to obtain




G˜(τ ) = − Σ




1 dⁿ



 ∫ τ







dτ₁Σ˜(τ₁)





∫ τ—τ1







dτ₂Σ˜(τ₂)





∫ τ—τn−1—···—τ1









dτnΣ˜(τn)e—E(τ —τ₁—τ₂—···—τn)
17



(81)



Note that the limits of integration are constraint to the phase space of forward propagating
pseudoparticles. Namely, the limit of λ    does not allow the time difference in the exponent to be
negative.
To evaluate the projected Dyson equation in a stable way, we first evaluate the following
moment-functions
a finite shift Em  Em + λ₀ (which is equivalent to λ  λ + λ₀), charge Q will decrease for e—βλ0
while the product Q eβλ⁰ = e—βFimp will remain the same. Similarly, all physical quantities are
invariant, while the projected pseudoparticle quantities are not. Hence, for numerical stable
evaluations, it is crucial to choose the

 1 ∫ τ         '
shift λ₀ such that pseudoparticle propagators are finite.

Sn(τ ) = n!   dτ′Σ˜(τ ′)e—E⁽τ—τ ⁾(τ − τ′)ⁿ,   (82)
A large λ₀ will make them exponentially small, while van-
ishing λ₀ will cause Gm to diverge at β. We thus need to fix the value of λ₀ properly. Two possible
choices are

and then we convolve the moment-functions with Σ. The
Eq. (81) is hence implemented by
Σm Gm(β − 0⁺) = const or Gm—gs(β − 0⁺) = const,

G(τ ) = −e—Eτ + S₁(τ ) − (Σ ∗ S₂)(τ )       (83)
+ (Σ ∗ (Σ ∗ S₃))(τ ) − · · · + (Σ ∗ (Σ ∗ · · · ∗ Sn))(τ )
where
∫ τ



where m  gs is the pseuodoparticle, which corresponds
to the ground state of the atom.
The basic idea for the bold-CTQMC is to sample self-energies for all pseudoparticles as well as the
local Green’s function. This is easiest to achive by defining the probabilty to be proportional to
the absolute value of the Luttinger-Ward functional |Φ[G, ∆]|, and the self-



Note that all terms in the expansion have the same sign (note Σ˜ < 0), hence the expansion
converges quite fast,
Σmm' =
δΦ[G, ∆]
δGm'm
(86)

and we typically need between 30-50 terms for numeri-
cally sufficient precison.
Convolutions can be evaluated by standard method
Gαβ =
1 δΦ[G, ∆]
⟨Q⟩ δ∆βα
(87)

of Fourier transforms, or, they can be cast into the form of matrix multiplications, once the
matrix Στ,τ' =
Σ(τ  τ′)dτ′ is precomputed and used for all terms in the expansion.
It is instructive to check the formula in two simple limits: i) Σ˜ = Σ₀δ(τ ), evaluates to G˜(τ ) =
−e—⁽E⁺Σ0)τ ;
where the first equation is contribution to the pseudopar-ticles self-energies, and the second is
contribution to the real-electron Green’s function (the impurity Green’s function).
The second identify might be less obvious, but it fol-lows from the fact that the impurity Green’s
function is the T-matrix for the conduction electrons
ii) Σ˜ = σ₀ = const and E = 0 evaluates to G˜(τ ) =

cosh(τ√σ₀).
The latter limit is very instructive because it shows that G can exponentially grow at low
temperature and finite τ . This is well known problem from implementing
1
g—¹ − Σc



ki,k'j

= gkiδki,jk' + gkiVk∗iαGαβ Vk'jβ. (88)

the NCA equations on real axis. To keep G˜(τ ) finite,
We have seen above that Gmm' carries a factor of e—λβ,

and peaked around the origin on real axis (G(τ ) roughly constant in τ ), one needs to shift all
pseudoparticle ener-gies Em → Em + λ₀ to sufficiently positive energies, such that  m  Gm(β  0 ) =
const, where const is of the
order unity. Namely, in grand canonical ensemble, the
pseudoparticle charge ⟨Q⟩, defined in Eq. (72), is
⟨Q⟩ = Σ Gm(β − 0⁺) = e—βλ Σ G˜m(β − 0⁺)  (85)
tor e—λβ, hence the pseudoparticle self-energy Σmm' is of the order of unity. On the other hand,
the conduction electron self-energy Σc is proportional to δΦ[G, ∆]/δ∆, and hence vanishes as e—βλ.
Therefore both Σc and Gαβ are proportional to e—βλ. The expansion of the equa-tion Eq. (88) in
powers of e—βλ shows that i) conduc-tion electron propagator gk is unrenormalized in this the-ory
(or equivalently the bare hybridization ∆ appears
ᵐ            ᵐ             in functional Φ[G, ∆]); ii) the impurity Green’s func-

indeed vanishes in the physical Q = 1 subspace. Once the projection is done, the physical
quantities in Q = 1 subspace are invariant with respect to shift of all pseu-doparticle energies by
the same amount. If we introduce
tion, evaluated in the grand-canonical ensemble Gαβ is equal to δΦ[G, ∆]/δ∆, which vanishes as
e—βλ. However, the physical quantities like the electron Green’s function must be evaluated in Q =
1 subspace, using Eq. (70).

18


The resulting ratio is of order unity and is invariant with respect to shift of λ₀, as explained
above.
The Luttinger-Ward functional Φ[G, ∆] for the lowest
If we take out the exponential factors, the NCA func-tional takes the form

order contribution (two kinks), known under the name   0
β
—βλ     ˜    ˜





Φ⁰[G, ∆] =
dτ Gmm' (τ )Gn'n(β − τ )∆αβ(−τ )

×(Fα)nm(Fβ†)m'n' (89)

If we denote Φ˜[G, ∆] = eβλ

Φ[G, ∆], we see that

Note that if integration variable is shifted to τ  β  τ , additional minus sign can appear.  In
case of regular fermions and bosons, this minus sign is automatically taken care of by the
antiperiodicity of fermionic Green’s
δΦ
Σ(τ ) =
δG(β − τ )
hence
=  δΦ
δG˜(β − τ )
e—λτ = Σ˜(τ )e—λτ ,

functions G(β  τ ) =  G( τ ). The pseudoparticle Green’s functions however vanish at negative
times, and one needs to add β to the negative argument, and add an overal minus sign when β is
added to the fermionic
Σ˜nn' (τ ) =
δΦ[G, ∆]
δG˜n'n(β − τ )
(92)

Green’s function.
The projected Φ˜[G˜, ∆] has exactly the same form as

The corresponding pseudoparticle self-energies are
δΦ⁰[G, ∆]
Φ[G, ∆], we only need to replace G diagram hence becomes
G˜. The NCA

f
'
δGn'n(β − τ )
(90)
Φ˜0[G˜, ∆] =
β
dτ G˜mm' (τ )G˜n'n(β − τ )∆αβ(−τ )



where ( 1)ᶠ is +1 (-1) if n corresponds to pseudo-boson (pseudo-fermion). Again, this minus sign is
because neg-ative times are not allowed for pseudoparticles.
Each pseudoparticle propagator carries an exponent e—λ∆τ , and the sum of exponents is always e—βλ.
This holds for all diagrams composed of exactly one loop of pseudoparticles. These are the only
diagrams that give contribution to the physical quantities.
×(Fα)nm(Fβ†)m'n' (93)
From Eqs. (92) and (93) it is clear that we achieved the goal of expressing all equations in terms
of projected quantities, which do not depend on variable λ, and are numerically well behaved.
The projected second order diagram, which correspond to OCA approximation, is given by




Φ˜1[G˜, ∆] =

β
dτ₄

∫ τ4



dτ₃
∫ τ3



dτ₂
∫ τ2



dτ₁G˜m m' (τ₁ − τ₄ + β)G˜m m' (τ₂ − τ₁)G˜m m' (τ₃ − τ₂)G˜m m' (τ₄ − τ₃)

(Fα†
)m' m0 ∆αβ(τ₁ − τ₃)(F
)m' m2 (F
α'†
)m' m1 ∆α'β' (τ₂)(F
'
)m' m3 (94)



The projected pseudoparticles vanish at negative times and are well behaved at positive times. For
the purpose of properly evaluating the Feynman diagrams in time, we can extend them to negative
times without any loss of generality. The pseudo-bosons hence become periodic, and the
pseudo-fermions antiperiodic. The annoying mi-nus signs (  1)ᶠ can then be eliminated.  However,
the projected pseudoparticles can not be Fourier transformed to imaginary frequency, and they do
not obey the usual Dyson equation, but rather a more complicated type of Dyson equations derived in
Eq. (81). The pseudoparti-cles can be analytically continued to real frequencies, and all
pseudoparticles satisfy fermionic-type of continuation, given in Eq. (78).
Finally, the Monte Carlo algorithm must generate any
skeleton diagram of any order. The probability to accept the diagram is proportional to its Φ[G, ∆]
. The contri-bution to pseudoparticle self-energy is then Σmm' (τ ) = sign(Φ)/Gm'm( τ ) , where
means the average in the Markov proces, where weights are proportional to Φ . Similarly, the
impurity Green’s function can be sam-pled by Gαβ(τ ) = sign(Φ)/∆βα( τ ) / Q . The sam-pled
self-energies will only be proportional to the exact self-energies. The renormalization factor can
easily be found knowing the probability for NCA diagram, and its value.
The requirement to sample the skeleton diagrams pro-hibits us to combine many diagrams into
determinant of hybridization functions ∆, as it was achieved in the algorithm by Werner et.al.²¹.
Similar type of trick of

19


combining the diagrams into determinant of ∆’s would substantially improve the efficiency of the
algorithm. It is however not clear how to eliminate non-skeleton dia-grams from determinant, and
keep the updating formulas efficient.
To test the above described algorithm, and to check its performance and convergence, we implemented
a sim-plified version of the bold-ctqmc for the canonical An-derson impurity model. We sampled all
diagrams up to certain order starting with first order (NCA), second or-der (OCA) and up to fifth
order. The fifth order takes only minutes on a typical personal computer. We first found the
topology of all diagrams of certain order, the prefactor and the sign of each diagram.  In Fig. 2
we plotted the diagrams for the first few orders (second - Φ⁽²⁾, ... fouth - Φ⁽⁴⁾). We colored the
diagrams accord-ing to their sign, positive with black and negative with red. There are four NCA
diagrams, two OCA diagrams, 8 third order diagrams (4 positive and 4 negative), 44
forth order diagrams (24 positive and 20 negative), 320 fifth order diagrams (128 positive and 192
negative). We evaluated exactly the NCA and OCA diagrams, and we used Metropolis algorithm to
sample the time arguments for higher order diagrams. The probability for the ac-ceptance of a set
of imaginary times was taken to be proportional to the value of the total Φ⁽ⁿ⁾(τ₁, τ₂, ...τ₂n) ,
hence at fifth order 320 diagrams were evaluated at each Monte Carlo step. While this algorithm can
not be used at very high orders in perturbation theory due to expo-nential growth in the number of
diagrams, its advantage is in large improvement of the sign problem. Namely, the diagrams of the
same order and the same time argu-ments tend to cancel at higher orders. Since we evaluate all of
them at each Monte Carlo step, the sign problem is almost completely eliminated.
The non-interacting limit U = 0 is the hardest case for the hybridization expansion algorithm,
because the coherence temperature is infinite. Here we present test of the algorithm in the case of
half-filled non-interacting Hubbard model on the Bethe lattice within DMFT. We want to emphasize
that the algorithm becomes more ef-ficient and faster converging in strongly interacting limit U >>
0, a case which will be presented elsewhere.
In Fig. 3(a) we show the impurity Green’s function on imaginary axis (at 1/T = 100) when the
perturbation theory is truncated at certain order. We also display the exact result by the dashed
line. While the NCA curve clearly deviates from the exact result, the higer order approximations
are hardly distinguished from the exact curve on this plot. In Fig. 3b we show separately the
con-tributions to the Green’s function from different orders in perturbation theory. As expected
the contribution from the lowest two orders is large, while the higher order con-tributions are
smaller. This shows why OCA approxima-tion is so successful in many realistic situations. The fifth
order contribution is on average only 3 × 10—³, and never exceeds 6 × 10—³.
In Fig. 4 we zoom-in the exponential drop of the





























FIG. 2:  All diagrams of the second, the third, and the fourth order in hybridization strength
which contribute to the Luttinger-Ward functional. The pseudoparticle-propagators run across the
ring, while the crossing lines stand for the hybridization ∆.  The full line represents spin-up,
and the dashed lines the spin-down hybridization. The black diagrams (both diagrams in Φ⁽²⁾, first
four in Φ⁽³⁾, and first 24 in Φ⁽⁴⁾) give positive contribution to Φ, and the red give negative
con-tribution.  Some diagrams seems to appear multiple times. This is because different
pseudoparticles appear in the ring. Since we do not use different line for each pseudoparticle,
some diagrams seem equivalent. However, it is very straighforward to deduce the pseudoparticle
propagators knowing the type and the direction of the conduction electron propagators.


Green’s function at short times. We see that the conver-gence with the perturbation order is very
encouraging.

For efficiency of the bold-ctqmc, it is important to monitor the sign of each individual diagram.
In Fig. 5 we show separately the contribution to the impurity Green’s function from the diagrams
with positive Φ and those with negative Φ, together with the sum of the two. At the third order,
the sum is around 70% of the positive contribution, while at the forth and fifth order, the sign
drops to 0.2 and 0.07, respectively. As explained above, the current implementation of the method,
which groups together all diagrams of a certain order in perturbation theory, does not have a
substantial minus sign problem. However, this method becomes expensive at high orders, and thus one
needs to resort to sampling of individual di-agrams, which can be performed to arbitrary high
order.

20



















FIG. 3:  (a) The comparison of the finite order perturbation theory result with the exact impurity
Green’s function. (b) The contributions to the impurity Green’s function up to the fifth order,
plotted separately order by order.
FIG. 5: The three panels show the contribution to the impu-rity Green’s function at 3rd, 4th and
5th order in perturbation theory. We show separately the contribution from the terms with positive
Φ and the terms with negative Φ.


have the same atomic energy Em. In the next step we check which of these degeneracy’s survive in
the presence of the crystal field environment (impurity hybridization
∆), and which off-diagonal propagators need to be con-sidered. We evaluate the following matrix
elements


αα' b2,b1
=              (F
f∈deg,(α,α')∈deg and ∆αα' /=0,

'
)b2f
(Fα†)
fb1(95)








FIG. 4: The same as in Fig. 3, but we zoom in the short time behaviour.


In the latter case, there will be a minus sign problem, as estimated here.


B. The One crossing approximation

In this section we will give the most general formulas for the One crossing approximation, and we
will explain
Here b runs in the Hilbert subspace of N and ƒ in the Hilbert supspace of N + 1. The matrix
elements (Fα)bf = b ƒα ƒ and (Fα†)fb = ƒ ƒα† b where ƒα is electron destruction operator. The sum
runs only over the ƒ states which are degenerate and over one electron states α which are also
degenerate and for which ∆αα' is nonzero in the considered crystal field symmetry. The resulting
matrix elements Cb2,b1 have the same symmetry as the propagators of the pseudoparticles Gb2b1 .
Clearly, in high symmetry crystal environment, most of the off-diagional matrix elements vanish and
the degeneracy of Gbb is high, but in low symmetry environment and in the broken symmetry state,
many of the off-diagonal propa-gators become crucial.
Once the symmtry of the propagators is known, we
determine all nonvanishing bubbles (NCA diagrams) and the matrix elements for each bubble. The NCA
matrix elements are

the crucial steps in implementing the algorithm.
We start with lowest order approximation, which is the Non-crossing approximation. When evaluating
these di-
αα' b1b2f1f2
=           (F
(f1,f2),(b1,b2),(α,α')∈deg
'
)b2f1
(Fα†)

f2b1
,(96)

agrams, we have to consider only two Hilbert subspaces of constant N at once, i.e., N and N + 1.
The first step is to compute all eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the atom in the subspace N and N +
1. We then group to-gether the atomic eigenstates, which are degenerate, i.e.,
where we sum only over degenerate states ƒ, b and degen-erate crystal field components α. The
Luttinger-Ward functional and the self-energy corrections are depicted in Fig. 6. We associate a
factor (Fα†)fb to each vertex that marks the creation of electron in bath α. Accordingly, we

21

add a factor (Fα)bf for each vertex of electron anhilation.

In the next step, we precompute the matrix elements of the one-crossing diagrams, which are
depicted in Fig. 7. Here we need to select three different Hilbert subspaces: N − 1, N , and N + 1
to compute

αα'ββ' f1f2f3f4b1b2a1a2

(F
deg
'
)b2f3 (F
'
)f4a1 (F
)a2f1 (F
)f2b1 (97)





FIG. 6: The NCA Luttinger-Ward functional and the self-energies within NCA.











FIG. 7: The Luttinger-Ward functional for the One Crossing Approximation (OCA).
Here b, ƒ , a run over the states with N  1, N and N + 1 number of particles, respectively. We add
only the most important crossing corrections, for which the particle number N is in the Hilbert
subspace of the ground state of the atom. We also select ƒi to be only the ground state multiplet
of the atom, or the atomic states with energy very close to the ground state energy. We compute the
matrix elements C and D only once in the DMFT self-consistent loop and we save them into the input
file for OCA impurity solver. The matrix elements C, D do need to be updated in the outer LDA+DMFT
charge loop. We typically update them every three to four charge steps, since the relative crystal
field splittings usually change very little during LDA+DMFT iterations. The atomic energies Em
change much more (due to the chemical po-tential shift), and need to be updated at every step.
The NCA diagrams on the real axis can be evaluated
with conventional techniques, and after the projection, they take the following form



Σ  (ω) = Σ − α'   (Fα†)  ∫ dy ƒ (y)∆''  (y)G  (ω + y)           (98)

Σ  (ω) = Σ − α'   (Fα†)  ∫ dy ƒ (−y)∆''  (y)G  (ω − y)           (99)



Aⁱᵐᵖ(ϵ) =   1
Σ ∫ dye—βy  α'




(Fα†)


''    ''
G  (y)G

(y + ϵ)


''
where G
= ImG. The pseudoparticle propagators G and
puted multiple times.

the pseudoparticle self-energies are related by the Dyson equation. The Eq. 67 shows that G =
1/(omega − E −
To take care of the diverging exponential factors, we
''

λ − Σ).
work with the projected quantities G(ω) = G
''
(ω)/ƒ (−ω)

Many of the pseudoparticle propagators and hybridiza-
and Σ˜(ω) = Σ (ω)/ƒ (−ω), as explained above. The


rather use the precomputed matrix elements Cαα'  ,
1 2 1 2
which make sure that no equivalent diagram (a diagram
which has the same frequency dependence) is not com-
to Fourier transform. Hence we can not use the Fourier transform for convolutions. We rather cast
the above equation into the form for matrix multiplication, for

22


which fast linear algebra packages such as BLAS, exist. We use the logarithmic mesh to resolve the
fine structure of the pseudoparticle green’s functions.
It is important to realize that the number of baths α is quite small (of the order of 2(2L + 1) for
correlated orbital of angular momentum L), while the number of atomic states is much bigger. Hence
we precompute the
''
We then calculate the convolution without building a new inside mesh. Let’s use the mesh xi  which
resolves func-tion g. Then, in the spirit of trapezoid rule, we can lin-early interpolate g between
the points
integral and the first moment of functions ∆ (ω)ƒ (ω)
''

and of ∆ (ω)ƒ (−ω) for all αα′. Within trapezoid rule,


Σ ∫ xi+1

enough to compute the above convolutions with matrix
multiplications on any given mesh.
i  xi
xi+1 − xi

(104)

To see that, lets consider an arbitrary convolution
∫


This integral can be expressed by the above defined func-tions. To show that, let us rewrite the
convolution and



Here the function g(x) is defined on a certain mesh xi , on which it is well resolved, i.e., g(xi)
gi. The function ƒ (y) is defined on another mesh  yi , i.e., ƒ (yi)  ƒi. The convolution can be
safely calculated on the union of both mashes xi, yj + z . One of the meshes should be shifted for
z, thus for each outside frequency, a different union of the two meshes should be formed and only
then

simple scalar product




Σ  ∫ xi+1—z xi₊₁ − z − u


consuming and not done in practice.
∫ xi—z
z + u − x     #

many other functions (like ∆ (ω)ƒ (ω) in our example

xi−1—z
xi − xi—1

above), we use the followin trick. We first precompute
the integral and the first moment of the function
∫ єi


≡ gi⟨ƒ⟩iz
i
dhi. (105)

F₂(ϵi) =
єi
uƒ (u)du       (102)
—∞
(103)


Thus ⟨ƒ⟩iz is








⟨ƒ⟩iz
= 2 (xi₊₁ − z)[F₁(xi₊₁ − z) − F₁(xi − z)] − F₂(xi₊₁ − z) + F₂(xi − z)         (106)
(xi+1 − xi—1)(xi+1 − xi)
(xi—₁ − z)[F₁(xi − z) − F₁(xi—₁ − z)] − F₂(xi − z) + F₂(xi—₁ − z)]         (107)
(xi+1 − xi—1)(xi − xi—1)






Hence the convolution of ƒ with many functions gm can be computed at once C(m,Σz) = gm ∗ ƒ by the
following


the second order diagrams, which correspond to OCA approximation and are depicted in Fig. 7. They
take the










Σb2b1




(ω) = −     (F
f1f2f3f4a1a2αβα'β'








'
)b2f3 (F








'
)f4a1




(Fβ†)









a2f1




(Fα†)









f2b1
23



×            (108)
× ∫ dy ƒ (y)∆''  (y)G  (ω + y) ∫ dxƒ (x)∆''  (x)G  (ω + x)G  (ω + x + y)



Σa2a1
(ω) = −     (F
f1f2f3f4b1b2αβα'β'
'
)b2f3 (F
'
)f4a1
(Fβ†)

a2f1
(Fα†)

f2b1
×            (109)

× ∫ dy ƒ (−y)∆''

(y)G
(ω − y) ∫ dxƒ (−x)∆''

(x)G

(ω − x)G

(ω − x − y)







Σf2f1



(ω) = −
f3f4a1a2b1b2αβα'β'
π

h(Fβ'



)b2f3 (F
αα'



α'
f4a1
f3f4





(Fβ†)







a2f1



(Fα†)
π


f2b1



+ (Fα)
ββ'



b2f1 (F
f1f2




'
)f2a1



(Fα'†)
b1b2





ₐ f (Fβ†)




f4b1 i ×

× ∫ dy ƒ (−y)∆''

(y)G
(ω − y) ∫ dxƒ (x)∆''

(x)G

(ω + x)G

(ω + x − y)        (110)



imp β'β
αα'f1f2f3f4b1b2a1a2
h(F


'
)b2f3 (F


'
)f4a1

(Fβ†)



a2f1

(Fα†)

f2b1 + (F


'
)b2f1 (F


'
)f2a1

(Fα†)



a2f3

(Fβ†)



f4b1
i(×111)
×    1    ∫ dye—αʸ ∫ dxƒ (x)∆''  (x)Im {G  (y)G  (x + y)} Im {G  (ϵ + y)G  (ϵ + x + y)}

eαλ⟨Q⟩ƒ (−ϵ)
π   αα'
b1b2
f1f2
f3f4
a1a2



In practice, we do not sum over all ƒ , b and a indices. As explained above, we precompute the
matrix elements
very different from a chosen model function. This ap-proach works very well for analytical
continuation of the

αα'ββ'
f1f2f3f4b1b2a1a2
for the most important processes. We
Green’s function G(τ ) to obtain spectral function on real

take only the low lying atomic states into account (only ƒ ’s which are part of the ground state
multiplet or with energy very close to the ground state). We also take into account the degeneracy
of all atomic states and the degeneracy of baths α, in order to avoid computing the equivalent
diagram mutliple times. Finally, the convolu-tions for the OCA approximation can also be cast into
the form of matrix multiplication, once the first moment and integrals of a few functions are
precomputed.


VIII. THE ANALYTIC CONTINUATION METHOD

The Monte Carlo impurity solvers are implemented on imaginary axis where the quantity being sampled
is real and many times even “sign-free”. The results obtained in this way are exact, except for the
statistical noise. How-ever, even a tiny statistical error on imaginary axis pre-cludes the
analytic continuation by Pade type of meth-ods. The standard method, to overcome the difficulty of
the singularity of the kernel, is the Maximum Entropy Method (MEM). The basic idea of this method
is to find a function on the real axis, which is very close to Monte Carlo data on imaginary axis
(within statistical error), and is smooth function on real axis, locally not
axis, i.e., to solve the integral equation
G(τ ) = − ∫ ƒ (−x)e—τˣA(x)dx

for A(x).
Knowing the spectral function, it is however not possi-ble to obtain the momentum resolved spectra,
or optical conductivity, or transport coefficients. To compute these properties, it is essential to
analytically continue the self-energy, rather then the Green’s function. The self-energy of
correlated materials is however very hard to analyti-cally continue with maximum entropy method,
because the self-energy typically has very sharp feature or even poles, which separate the low
energy part of the spec-tra (the quasiparticle peak) from the high energy part of the spectra (the
Hubbard bands). Due to the max-imum entropy method requirements of smoothness, the analytically
continued self-energy at low energy is typ-ically polluted with the near-by poles, which appear in
the self-energy at the intermediate energy.
A successful analytic continuation method for self-
enery needs to met the following conditions:
imaginary axis self-energy is equal to Monte Carlo data within the statistical error
real axis self-energy function must be locally smooth



the power-expansion around zero frequency should match the quantum Monte Carlo data on both, real
and imaginar axis.
While the first two conditions are met by MEM, the last is not.
We developed an alternative method, which mets the above conditions and was very successfully used
in com-bination with CTQMC for pnictides¹¹, cuprates⁶⁴, VO₂ and other materials. Although the
method has many pa-rameters, which needs to be choosen appropriately, we can always check its
accuracy by recomputing the spec-tral function of the lattice, using analytically continued
self-energy, and comparing the spectral function to the maximum entropy continued spectra.
We expand the self-energy in terms of modified Gaus-
24

Since the modified Gaussians all vanish at zero fre-quency, we add a polynomial function around
zero fre-quency. The coefficients of the polinomial are determined by fitting the imaginary axis
self-energy, i.e.,

Σ(ωn) = Σ₀ + (−b₁ + ia₁)ωn + (−a₂ − ib₂)ω² (114)

which can be analytically continued to

Σ(ω) = Σ₀ + (a₁ + ib₁)ω + (a₂ + ib₂)ω²   (115)

The polynomial has to drop-off sufficiently fast at high frequency, hence we choose the following
function

sians  , and we add a polynomial function around zero frequency
ΣM (z) = Σ cnL(En, z) + ƒ₀(z)   (112)


''
ƒ0 (ω) =

''
Σ0 + ωb₁ + ω b₂
Σ0 Γ²/(ω² + Γ²)

/ 1 + (ω²b₂/Γ²)²

(116)

n
The modified Gaussians
where the upper choice is made for metals and the lower choice for insulators and very bad metals.
In the FL

regime, we have b₁
''
 1, |Σ₀ | ∝ Z π T . The coefficient

''
L (En
1
, ω) =   √
e—b /4—(log(ω/En)/b)   (113)
Γ is determined by the condition ƒ₀(ω = 1) 1

b|En| π
For speed, we precompute L(En
'
, iω) and L (En
, ω) by

have a unique peoperty that they are peaked at En, with the width of approximately En, while they
exponentially
1 ∫ dxL'' (E

, x)

vanish at zero frequency. They are asymmetric with slow
decay away from zero and very fast decay towards zero
L(En, z) = −π
.   (117)
z − x '

frequency. We choose the modified Gaussians centered
n
Similarly, we also precompute ƒ₀(iω) and ƒ₀(ω). Also the
''
integral of the functions In =  dxL (E , x) and I₀ =
on a logarithmic mesh of En = ±πTw  with w ∼ 1.5.  ∫  ''

The modified Gaussians functions were used in connec-tion with constructing the NRG spectral
function⁶⁵. We typically take the parameter b to be ∼ 0.8.
dxƒ₀ (x) are precomputed.
The coefficients cn in expansion Eq. (112) are deter-mined by minimizing the following functional




χ =
ωn∈sampled
|ΣM (iωn) − ΣQMC(iωn)| + α₁|I(ΣM ) − ID| + α₂|ΣM (0) − Σ₀|    (118)

 dΣM (0)
    d2ΣM
(0)

+α₃
dω  − (a₁ + ib₁)
+ α₄
dω2  − 2(a₂ + ib₂)
(119)



Here ωn in the first term runs over the imaginary fre-quencies which are sampled by QMC (and not
over the analytically added tail). The second terms imposes the correct value of the integral of
the self-energy. The inte-gral of the expansion (112) is

I(ΣM ) =  cnIn + I₀,
n

which needs to match the 1/(ωn) tail of the QMC data
''
Finally, the last three terms ensure that the value, and the first two derivatives of the
analytically continued self-energy at zero frequency match the derivatives on imag-inary axis. For
minimization, we use the L-BFGS-B al-rorithm of Ref. 66.


IX. CERIUM α-γ TRANSITION

To test our implementation of DFT+DMFT within Wien2K method, we show in Figs. 8 and 9 results for

ID = π lim
ωn→∞
ωnΣQMC (ωn)
cerium α to γ transition.

25



















FIG. 8: Total and partial density of states of elemental cerium metal in both phases, α and γ
phase. We used OCA impurity solver.
FIG. 10: The hybridization function of the jz = 5/2 subshell within LDA and within DMFT in both
phases.



















FIG. 9: The same data as in Fig. 8, but obtained by continu-ous time quantum Monte Carlo solver,
and analytical contin-uation method.
FIG. 11:  Optical conductivity of α-Ce and γ-Ce within LDA(Wien2K)+DMFT method. Note the shoulder
in α-Ce conductivity, which is due to excitations across the two quasi-particle peaks (4f : 5/2 and
4f : 7/2) clearly visible in figure 8, and also measured by experiment of Ref. 67.


by 30% to account for the screening in the solid. Both phases of Ce have fcc unit cell with quite
different vol-

umes, V = 28.06˚A3
3
and Vγ = 34.37A . The results were

At a temperature less than 600 K and pressure less
than 20 kbar, elemental cerium undergoes a transition between two isostructural phases: a high
pressure phase or α phase and a low pressure γ phase.  In α-Ce the ƒ electron is delocalized while
in γ-Ce the ƒ electron is localized. The transition is well accounted for by phe-nomenological
Kondo Volume Collapse picture⁶⁸–⁷⁰.
We treat only the Ce 4  ƒ electrons as strongly corre-lated thus requiring full energy resolution,
while all other electrons such as Ce spd are assumed to be well described by the GGA. We choose U =
5.5 eV and J = 0.68 eV for the Coulomb interaction. The value of U was obtained by constraint DFT
calculation⁷¹ and J was computed us-ing the atomic physics program of Ref. 42 and reduced
converged with 5000-k points, we use the GGA functional for the DFT part and use OCA and CTQMC
impurity solver to solve the auxliliary impurity problem.
The results in Fig. 8 (obtained by OCA) and Fig. 9 (obtained by CTQMC) are practically identical
and very similar to previous LDA(LMTO)+DMFT results⁷². One can clearly see the broad quasiparticle
peak in α-Ce, split by the spin-orbit coupling  0.3 eV. The lower peak has mostly 5/2 character and
the upper peak mostly 7/2-character. The system is in good Fermi liquid regime at the temperature
of 150 K used in the calculation. The second phase with larger volume is in local moment regime
with no visible Kondo peak at the Fermi level, but enhanced Hubbard bands.

26


It is instructive to examine the hybridization function
∆ = ω  Eimp  Σ  1/G as computed by LDA and self-consistent DMFT (see Fig. 10). It turns out that in
Ce, the low energy hybridization function is substantially re-duced compared to its LDA value. The
two large peaks at  0.4 eV and 0.7 eV are absent in DMFT hybridization. Since the coherence scale
is exponential function of hy-bridization, the coherence scale is lower in DMFT than it would be in
so called one-shot DMFT. It is known from the early days of the Kondo volume collapse theory⁶⁹,
that the LDA hybridization in a one-shot calculation was too big and had to be renormalized by
phenomenological parameter⁷³. DMFT reduces the hybridization through the collective screening
effects and hence is able to give correct coherence scale of the problem.
Finally, let us show optical conductivity, as imple-mented in LDA(Wien2K)+DMFT method. The overal
agrement with previous LDA+DMFT results¹⁰ is very good. The new computational results are in even
slightly better agreement with experiment of Ref. 67, since they both clearly display a shoulder
around 0.3 eV in α-Ce, which we can now clearly identify as excitations across the split
quasiparticle peak. The splitting is due to spin-orbit coupling in Ce.


X. HEAVY FERMION 115 MATERIALS

The heavy fermion 115 materials have a chemical for-mula CeXIn₅, where X is either Co, Rh or Ir.
They crys-tallize in layered tetragonal structure shown in Fig. 12, composed of Ce-In layers and
X-In layers.
At high temperature, the low energy electronic states are composed of mainly the broad spd bands of
In and Ce. The Ce-4ƒ electrons are localized and their spectra is mostly contained in Hubbard
bands, which are more than 2 eV away from the Fermi level.  These electrons behave as local
magnetic moments. As the temperature is reduced, the moments combine with the conduction electrons
to form a fluid of very heavy quasiparticles, with masses that are two or three orders of magnitude
larger then the mass of the electrons.
The low temperature physics of 115 materials is very puzzling. The heavy fermion physics comes
primarily from the Ce-In layer. Indeed, the related material CeIn₃ has only the Ce-In layers (no
X-In layer), and also dis-plays a similar heavy fermion properties with supercon-ductivity at very
low temperature. However, 115 mate-rials are very sensitive to the substitution of the transi-tion
metal ion in the X-In layer although Co, Rh and Ir ions have the same valence (they are isovalent).
In-deed the three 115 materials have dramatically different low energy properties: CeCoIn₅ is a
superconductor with Tc  2.3 K, CeRhIn₅ is antiferromagnet with TN  3.5 K, while CeIrIn₅ is
superconductor with Tc of only 0.4 K. A fundamental question arises: Why are the low energy
properties of 115 materials so different?
A hint to the resolution of this problem was given in















FIG. 12: Crystal structure of CeXIn5. Red, yellow and gray spheres correspond to Ce, X, and In
atoms, respectively.


Ref. 58, where the DFT+DMFT calculation for CeIrIn₅ indicated that the Ce 4ƒ electrons hybridize
stronger to the out of plane In-p electrons, than the in-plane In p electrons. Here we carried out
the DFT+DMFT calcula-tion for all three 115 materials and we show the difference in electronic
structure between the three materials. We used the code based on LDA-LMTO code of Ref. 32 as well
as the new LAPW code based on Wien2K³¹ code. The results obtained by our DFT+DMFT method in the two
codes are almost indistinguishable.  For the impu-rity solver, we used both OCA (described above)
and CTQMC²³.  The analytic continuation of CTQMC re-sults was performed with the method described
in chap-ter VIII.
Fig. 13A shows the total density of states (DOS) and the partial Ce-4ƒ DOS for all three materials
at low tem-perature of 7 K. The transition metal ion DOS is peaked around binding energy 2eV, where
the difference of DOS is large. The partial Ce-4ƒ DOS of the three compound is very similar, except
at the very low energy. Fig. 13B zooms-in the low energy part of the spectra. We see that CeIrIn₅
compound has the largest quasiparticle peak, the CeCoIn₅ follows, while the CeRhIn₅ has
substantially smaller quasiparticle peak at the same temperature of 7 K.
Our view on the localization-itinerancy in 115 materi-als is sketched in Fig. 14. Rh compound is
most local-ized, while Ir compound is most itinerant. Co compound is similar to Ir compound, but
slightly less itinerant than Ir-115.
It is well known from the pressure experiments⁷⁴,⁷⁵ that Rh compound is more localized then Co
compound. Namely, under pressure of 1 GPa the Rh compound becomes superconducting, and at pressure
of   2 GPa reaches similar maximum TC as is the maximum TC of Co compound⁷⁶. Hence the pressure of
the order of GPa sufficiently increases the Ce-4ƒ hybridization that it overcome the difference
between localization of the electrons in the two compounds.  Experimentally it is a bit less clear
what is the relation between Ir and

27










FIG. 14:  The sketch of the itinerancy/localization of the three 115 compounds. In our view, the Ir
compound is most itinerant, while the Rh compound is most localized. The Co compound is not
localized enough to develop magnetic order at low temperature, while it is nor a good metal. It is
thus conceivable that it would show tendency towards supercon-ductivity.  This phenomena is however
beyond our current theoretical method - the single site DMFT calculation. We also show the bond
distances between Ce and In atoms, and the angle between Ce and out-of-plane In atom.  None of
these parameters can explain the actual order of the com-pounds, hence the structure itself can not
explain the trend of localized to itinerant transition in these compounds.














FIG. 13: Total density of states (full lines) and partial Ce-4f density of states (dashed lines)
for CeCoIn , CeRhIn and
itinerant side of the phase diagram. Hence the low super-conducting transition temperature might be
connected with too itinerant nature of carriers.
We further analize the difference in itinerancy by plot-ting the hybridization function at zero
frequency ∆(ω = 0)LL resolved in crystal field basis. The 14 dimensional matrix of hybridizations
has a 6 dimensional j = 5/2 component and a 9 dimensional j = 7/2 component. The itinerancy (the
quasiparticle peak) is almost entirely from the j = 5/2 component, hence we will not analize j =
7/2 part. The degeneracy of the 5/2 shell is lifted in tetragonal crystal environment and
hybridization splits into Γ—, Γ⁺ and Γ₆ components. The Γ₆ corresponds
5      5          7   7        +     —

CeIrIn5 materials. The lower pannel show the low energy part
of the Ce-4f density of states for all three compounds. We used OCA solver.


Co compound, since both compounds are superconduc-tors at low T. Ir compound has somewhat smaller
spe-cific heat coefficient in normal state than Co compound (750 mJ/(molK²) for Ir-115 versus 1000
mJ/(molK²) for
to jz =  1/2, while Γ7 and Γ7 correspond approxi-
mately to jz = 3/2 and jz = 5/2, respectively. In Fig. 15 we plot the hybridization ( Im[∆(0)]/π)
in polar coor-dinates with Ce atom in the center and In atoms around. The plot is the cut in xz
direction. The three dimensional orbitals that correspond to the three crystal fields are plotted
in the lower pannel of Fig. 15 together with the real space positions of In and Ce atoms. In this
decom-position, hybridizations Γ⁺ and Γ— are pointing towards
7    7
Co-115)⁷⁷,⁷⁸. Ir compound has also somewhat lower resis-

tivity in the normal state⁷⁹. Moreover, nuclear quadrupol resonance (NQR) measurements of 1/(T₁T
)⁸⁰ suggest that Ir-compound might be more itinerant than other Ce-compound. Indeed pressurizing
the CeIrIn₅⁸¹ along the crystallographic c-direction, which increases itinerancy⁸², decreases TC.
Furthermore, it was shown that Cd-doping acts as reverse pressure in 115’s⁸³.  Since higher
Cd-doping is necessary for appearance of antiferromagnetic phase in CeIrIn₅ than in CeCoIn₅, this
is also suggestive of more itinerant nature of Ir-compound.
out of plane In (In₂) and in-plane In (In₁), respectively.
The third component, Γ₆ is pointing towards transition metal ion.
When comparing hybridization of the three 115 com-pounds, the Ir compound has all three components
of the hybridization larger than the other two compounds. In Co-115 all three hybridizations are
slightly smaller, while in Rh-115 all three hybridizations are substantially smaller.
Furthermore, comparing the strength of the three com-ponents of the hybridization, one can notice
that in Ir

Our results are thus consistent with the resistivity
compound the Γ⁺
component, pointing towards out-of

experiments⁷⁹, NQR experiments⁸⁰ and recent pressure experiments⁸¹, and indicate that Ir compound
is on the
plane In, is largest. This is consistent with the exper-imental finding of Oeschler et al.⁸² that
the Gru¨neisen

28

Finally, in contrast to Ir and Co compound, Rh com-pound has largest Γ₆ hybridization, followed by
Γ⁺ and
Γ7—.





















FIG. 16: The frequency dependence of the three most im-
''
portant hybridization functions ∆ (ω)/π in all three 115 com-

''
FIG. 15: The Ce-4f Weiss field hybridization function |∆
|/π
pounds: CeCoIn5, CeRhIn5 and, CeIrIn5. The frequency is in units of eV.

decomposed into crystal field components of tetragonal field.
All quantities are in units of eV. The upper plot shows the 2D projection of the three relevant
orbitals, while the lower pannel shows their 3D shapes (blue dots mark the position of the in-plane
In atoms, while the red dots the position of the out-of-plane In atoms). The radial extend of the
orbitals in the polar plot of the upper panel is proportional to the value
''
|∆ |/π at zero frequency. The full/dashed/dotted lines corre-
spond to CeIrIn5/CeCoIn5/CeRhIn5. While all three compo-nents of hybridization Γ−, Γ⁺, and Γ6, are
largest (smallest)

In Fig. 16 we show the frequency dependent hybridiza-tion function  Im∆(ω)/π to demonstrate that
the retar-dation effects in heavy fermion materials are very non-trivial and that the buildup of
the quasiparticle peak in spectral function usually results in a sharp peak in hy-bridization, on
the background of the depleted region of hybridization. The peak is sometimes called the collec-
7   7                      tive hybridization, because it arises from the lattice ef-

in CeIrIn5 (CeRhIn5) compound, Γ⁺ takes the largest value and also changes more than the other two
components.


parameters in c-direction is 2.5 times bigger that in a direction, resulting in larger effective
coherence scale in c-direction.
In Co-compund the Γ⁺ and Γ₆ components have simi-lar strength, while Γ₇— is smaller, hence the
hybridization in c-direction is still more important than in ab-plane, consistent with Gru¨neisen
parameter measurements⁸². It was shown in Ref. 58 that the double peak structure of the optical
conductivity is directly related to the strength of the two hybridizations. The hybridization gap
in one part of the momentum space is larger, and is primarily due to out of plane In, and the
hybridization gap in some other part of momentum space, controled mainly by the in-plane In, is
smaller, resulting in double peak structure of the mid-infrared optics peak. Optical measurements
on CeCoIn₅ of Singley et al ⁸⁴ demonstrated very clearly that the mid-infrared peak is split into
two peaks, one at 250 cm—¹ and one at 630 cm—¹, which can hint towards substantial difference in
the two types of hybridization.
fects. Namely, the Ce-4ƒ electrons on neighboring atoms also become delocalized, enhancing the
hybridization at low energy. However, the spd-electrons need to screen many Ce-4ƒ moments, and
therefore the effective spd hy-bridization is actually slightly reduced, resulting in deple-tion
away from the Fermi level, sometimes called Kondo hole.
Our results demonstrate that the degree of itinerancy is controlled by the collective
hybridization, encoded into the Weiss mean field hybridization ∆(ω) within DMFT. But what is the
origin of the difference between the three compounds? In Fig. 14 we show the parameters of the
lattice structure, namely the Ce-In(1) distance, the Ce-In(2) distance and the angle between the
CeIn₃ plane and out of plane In (In₂). From these numbers, it is clear that none of the three
quantities follows the trend of itinerancy. Hence the difference in the lattice structure is likely
not the key element.
To demonstrate that the difference in the lattice struc-ture is not the driving force, we performed
the DMFT calculation for the three compounds using the same lat-tice structure of CeIrIn₅. The
results were very similar to the results plotted in Fig. 13, with only slight increase

29

in itinerancy of Rh compound. This demonstrates that the chemistry of the transition metal ion
(difference be-tween 3d, 4d and 5d orbitals) is the driving force of the itinerancy, and not the
diffrence in the crystal structure. The latter are the secondary effects.




















FIG. 17: Temperature dependence of the magnetic moment of the comensurate AFM Neel state in
CeRhIn5.


Since CeRhIn₅ remains in local moment regime down to very low tempeture of the order of the RKKY
inter-action, it is worth trying to stabilize a magnetic solution within DMFT. To this end, we
doubled the unit cell and allowed the comensurate antiferromagnetic ordering with the wave vector
(1/2, 1/2, 1/2). Experimentally, the or-der is a helical spiral with wave vector (1/2, 1/2, 0.298)
and TC of 3.8 K. The broken symmetry solution can be stabilized below T   3 K as shown in Fig. 17.
The mag-netization has a typical mean field form, as expected for a theory with spatial mean-field
character like DMFT.
An interesting question is how does the large moment antiferromagnetic solution change the emerging
quasipar-ticle peak. We have shown in Fig. 13 that even in more localized CeRhIn₅ a peak starts to
develop at the Fermi level by decreasing temperature, hence coherence starts to develop at quite
high temperature similar to the other two compounds.  However, the height of the quasipar-ticle
peak is smaller and the scattering rate of Ce-4ƒ orbital (imaginary part of the self-energy) is
higher in CeRhIn₅.  The long range order state develops from a state with a partially screened
moment.  In Fig. 18 we show the density of states of the two phases, the para-magnetic state and
the Neel state.  The latter has no quasiparticle peak left and only a very broad background of the
ƒ spectral weigh remains at the Fermi level. The lower panel of Fig. 18 compares a very coherent
quasi-particle peak of CeIrIn₅ with the partially screened state of CeRhIn₅ above TNₑₑl and in the
ordered state below TNₑₑl, to emphasize the dramatic difference in the den-sity of state at low
energy. Because the full coherence of quasiparticles is not reached to very low temperature in






FIG. 18: Total and partial Ce-4f density of states for Rh-115 below and above the AFM transition.
Above the Neel temperature, there is a signature of Kondo effect, wich par-tially screenes magnetic
moment at elevated temperatures, even though the system develops the long range order below 3K. The
quasiparticle peak is however much smaller than the same peak in CeIrIn5 material. Once in the
ordered state, the quasiparticle peak dissapears.








CeRhIn₅, and the non-local RKKY interaction is strong enough, it interrupts the formation of
coherent quasi-particles. Within DMFT, this is reflected in two stable solutions of DMFT equations,
the paramagnetic and the magnetic solution. We note that we did not prove the stability of the
magnetic solution compared to the para-magnetic solution, because this would require a compar-ison
between free energies, a task beyond our current capabilities. However, our experience from model
calcu-lations suggests that when the magnetic DMFT solution can be stabilized, it usually has lower
free energy than the nonmagnetic solution.

30


XI. CONCLUSION

In the first part of the article, we discussed in de-tail the implementation of DFT+DMFT in full
potential methods. We defined the central object of the DMFT, the local Green’s function using a
projection operator. We showed that the projector used in LDA+U imple-mentations leads to
non-causal DMFT equations and that the straightforward projection to the solution of the
Schr¨odinger equation within the Muffin Tin sphere leads to spectral weight loss. We suggested an
alternative pro-jection that resolves these shortcomings.
We sketched the algorithmic steps within an implemen-tion of DFT+DMFT in the full potential
methods, using a formulation which avoids the ambiguities of downfold-ing or Wannier orbital
construction. Hence, the kinetic energy operator and electron density are not approx-imated by a
tight-binding parameterization, which al-lowed us to carry out a charge density self-consistent
cal-culation.
In the second part of the article, we concentrated on impurity solvers based on the hybridization
expansion. We derived the equations for the bold continuous time quantum Monte Carlo (CTQMC)
method, which samples the dressed propagators, as opposed the bare propagators sampled in current
CTQMC methods. We showed a few test results for simplified implementation of the method. In this
part of the article we also gave detailed formulas for the impurity solver called the One-crossing
approxi-mation, which can be viewed as the four kink approxi-mation within the bold CTQMC.
Finally we give details on a new analytic continua-tion method, which can continue the self-energy
from the imaginary to the real axis. This step is crucial when com-puting the response functions
within DMFT, as done in section VI for transport coefficients.
In the third part of the article, we presented the test results of our DFT+DMFT implementation on a
classical problem of strong correlations, the isostructural transi-tion of elemental cerium from
its γ phase at high tem-perature to its α phase at low temperature.
In the last part of the article, we applied the DFT+DMFT method to a group of heavy fermion
com-pounds, namely CeIrIn₅, CeCoIn₅ and CeRhIn₅, collec-tively dubbed the Ce-115s. Although the
isovalent sub-stitution of a transition metal ion does not substantially alter the Ce-In planes,
which are believed to be respon-sible for the heavy mass in these compounds, the ground state
properties of these materials are very different.
We analyzed the electronic structure of the three Ce-115 materials and showed that the Ce-4ƒ
electrons in CeRhIn₅ are more localized that those in the other two
115 compounds, in agreement with experiments.  Be-low 3 K, an antiferromagnetic DFT+DMFT solution
in CeRhIn₅ is stable, while CeCoIn₅ and CeIrIn₅ remain paramagnetic (the AFM solution is not
stable) down to the lowest temperature T = 1.5 K explored in our calcu-lation.
The hybridization in CeIrIn₅ is very anisotropic with the largest component pointing towards the
out-of-plane In. The hybridization is slightly smaller in CeCoIn₅, hence we believe CeIrIn₅ to be
more itinerant than the other two compounds.
We speculate that the reason CeCoIn₅ exhibits the highest superconducting TC is due to the fact
that it is at the border between itinerancy and localization, while CeIrIn₅ is on the itinerant
side of the phase diagram and CeRhIn₅ is on the localized side.  The position of CeRhIn₅ in the
phase diagram is clear from the pres-sure experiments, while the position of CeIrIn₅ is less
obvious. We believe that recent uniaxial pressure exper-iments⁸¹ confirm our view, since the c-axis
compression, which makes CeIrIn₅ more itinerant, decreases the super-conducting Tc.


XII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We thank Gabriel Kotliar for careful reading of the manuscript and numerous usefull suggestions
from the early stage of the project till its completion.  We are grateful to Jim Allen and David
Pines for fruitful dis-cussion. K.H was supported by Grant NSF NFS DMR-0746395 and DMR-0806937, and
Alfred P. Sloan fellow-ship. C.H.Y was funded by NSF DMR-0806937 and K.K. by Petroleium Research
Fund 48802-DNI10.
Note added: As the writing of this work was be-ing completed, we became aware of a related work of
M. Aichhorn et al. (arXiv: 0906.3735) also reporting on an implementation of LDA+DMFT in a LAPW
code. However, in contrast to our implementation, the authors used downfolding method to obtain a
tight-binding model Hamiltonian, and hence could not compute electronic charge self-consistently.
In the process of downfolding, the authors used projection P ¹ defined in section II. Furthermore,
the impurity solver did not take into ac-count the full Coulomb interaction Eq. (28). Only the
density-density part of the interaction was considered by
M. Aichhorn et al. (only the z component of the Hund’s coupling) which allows substantial
simplification of the impurity solver, but leads to improper description of the multiplet structure
of the correlated atoms.


Appendix A: Complex Tetrahdron Method

The formulas for tetrahedron integral in case of com-plex eigenvalues are very similar to the case
of real eigen-values. However, a special attention needs to be payed to choose the right branch-cut
in logarithms, such that all terms in the sum are causal.
First step in tetrahedron method consists of dividing the first Brillouin zone into tetrahedra
which fill up whole space. Each thrahedra has four corners. The energy is thus interpolated ε = ε₁
+ a(ε₂ −ε₁) + b(ε₃ −ε₁) + c(ε₄ −

31


ε₁), where a, b and c run between 0 and 1 when visiting corners of tetrahedra.
For the Green’s function we need integral of the form
where
ilv(x, y) = 1 y² { u⁴[log(x) − log(x + y)] + log(x + y)

 Ck    w(k, ω)C ω − εk
(A1)

+ u³
+ 1 u² 2

− u}     (A7)


and for the electron density and the chemical potential we need
and u = x/y
Appendix B: Transport integrals

Σ ∫ ω2
dω Ck
ω − ε
→ Σ wi(k, ω)Ck   (A2)

To compute the transport coefficients, we need to eval-

k  ω1       k   k
uate to high precision the following integrals

The integral is first written as the sum over all tetra-hedra and the integral in the interior of
tetrahedra:
P (z) = ∫ dx − dƒ  1

(B1)
1           dx  x − z

Σ Ck
= Σ ∫
d³k Ck
= Σ Σ

w(ki, ω)Ck
P (z, γ) = ∫ dx
− dƒ     1
(B2)

k ω − εk
t  t  ω − εk
i         2
t ki=1
dx  |x − z + ix2γ|2

(A3)
Q (z, γ) = ∫ dx − dƒ   1
(B3)

The latter is evaluated analytically using linear interpo-      ²
lation inside the volume of the tetrahedra for both the
dx  (x − z + ix2γ)2

nominator and denominator
The integrals need to be carefully implemented and

1
w(ki, ω) = 6  dc
0
1—c
db
0
1—b—c

0
da ×  (A4)
special care needs to be taken for the two case: a) |z|  1 and b) |z |  1 and |γ|  1.

 (1 − a − b − c)δki,1 + aδki,2 + bδki,3 + cδki,4 ω − ε₁ − a(ε₂ − ε₁) − b(ε₃ − ε₁) − c(ε₄ − ε₁)
The first integral of Eq. (B1) is computed numerically,
except in the following cases

Here we used a short notation εki
≡ εi

P₁(z) =
−(1/z + c₀/z³ + c₁/z⁵ + c₂/z⁷ + c₃/z⁹) |z| > 10 w (z′) + iπ ᵈᶠ (z′)             |z'' |  1

The integrals are analytic and a closed expression for
computing the green’s function is
0     dx

where

w(k , ω) = Σ Q
ω − εj
lv (ω − ε , ε
− ε )

i


where

j/=i
l/=i,j (εl − εj )
j  j  i

w₀(x) = P
df dt
t − x

lv(x, y) = x 1 − x [log(x + y) − log(x)]   (A5)
is precomputed on a fine mesh and interpolated using



and l = i, j means l = i and l = j. Notice that only log(x + y) and log(x) can appear in lv(x, y)
(not log(y)) to ensure causality. Namely, imaginary part of all εi is

c₀ =
π2
3 , c₁ =
7π⁴
15 , c₂ =
31π⁶
21 , c₃ =
127π⁸
(B4)
15

strictly negative, hence the expression lv (ω − εj, εj − εi) contains log(ω − εj) and log(ω − εi),
which both have
The second integral of Eq. (B2) is computed numeri-
''
cally, except in the following cases i) |z | 1, γ| 1: In

imaginary part in the interval [0, π].
Similarly, the formulas for the integral over frequency
this limit it becomes P (z, γ)   π ᵈᶠ (z ), ii) z > 14:
|z | dx

∫ ω2 w(k , ω)dω are
In this case, the power expansion in terms of |z|2 is per-

ω1   i

Σ ilv(ω₂ − εj, εj − εi)
formed and all terms are analytically evaluated.
''
Similarly we treat integral Eq. (B3). For |z

| 1,

wi(ki, ω₂, ω₁) =
Q  (ε − ε )
2
|γ| 1 we approximate Q (z, γ) ∼  (a) −

Σ ilv(ω₁ − εj, εj − εi)
and for |z| > 8 we perform the power expansion in terms

−
j/=i
Ql/=i,j
(εl
(A6)
− εj)
of z
and analytically evaluated the resulting integrals.



¹ A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. J. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 13 (1996).
² V. I. Anisimov, A. I. Poteryaev, M. A. Korotin, A. O.

32


Anokhin, and G. Kotliar, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 9, 7359 (1997).
³ A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. B 57, 6884 (1998).
⁴ Gabriel Kotliar and Dieter Vollhardt, Physics Today 57, 53 (2004).
⁵ G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko, O. Parcollet, and C. A. Marianetti Rev.
Mod. Phys. 78, 865 (2006).
⁶ S. Y. Savrasov, G. Kotliar, and E. Abrahams, Nature Lon-don, 410, 793 (2001).
⁷ S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett.
96, 036404 (2006).
⁸ J. H. Shim, K. Haule, S. Savrasov, G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 126403 (2008).
⁹ X. Dai, S. Y. Savrasov, G. Kotliar, A. Migliori, H. Ledbet-ter, and E. Abrahams, Science 300, 953
(2003).
¹⁰ K. Haule, V. Oudovenko, S. Y. Savrasov, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 036401 (2005).
¹¹ K. Haule, J. H. Shim, G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 226402 (2008).
¹² J. H. Shim, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Nature London 446, 513 (2007).
¹³ C. A. Marianetti, K. Haule, G. Kotliar, and M. J. Fluss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 056403 (2008).
¹⁴ J. H. Shim, K. Haule, G. Kotliar, Eur. Phys. Lett. 85, 17007, (2009).
¹⁵ V. S. Oudovenko, G. Palsson, K. Haule, G. Kotliar, and
S. Y. Savrasov, Phys. Rev. B 73, 035120 (2006).
¹⁶ S.Y. Savrasov, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 69, 245101 (2004).
¹⁷ Alexander B. Shick, Jindrich Kolorenc, Alexander I. Licht-enstein, Ladislav Havela,
arXiv:0903.1998.
¹⁸ J. Minar, L. Chioncel, A. Perlov, H. Ebert, M. I. Kat-snelson, and A.I. Lichtenstein, Phys. Rev.
B 72, 045125 (2005).
¹⁹ F. Lechermann, A. Georges, A. Poteryaev, S. Biermann,
M. Posternak, A. Yamasaki, and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B 74, 125120 (2006).
²⁰ B. Amadon, F. Lechermann, A. Georges, F. Jollet,
T. O. Wehling, and A. I. Lichtenstein, Physical Review B 77, 205112 (2008).
²¹ P. Werner, A. Comanac, L. de Medici, M. Troyer, and A.
J. Millis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 076405 2006.
²² A. N. Rubtsov, V. V. Savkin, and A. I. Lichtenstein, Phys. Rev. B 72, 035122 2005.
²³ Kristjan Haule, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155113 (2007).
²⁴ P. Werner and A.J. Millis, Phys. Rev. B 74, 155107 (2006).
²⁵ K. Haule, S. Kirchner, J. Kroha, and P. Wo¨lfle, Phys. Rev. B 64, 155111 (2001).
²⁶ X. Dai, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 72, 045111 (2005).
²⁷ S. Y. Savrasov, V. Oudovenko, K. Haule, D. Villani, and
G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 71, 115117 (2005).
²⁸ V. I. Anisimov et. al, Phys. Rev. B 71, 125119 (2005).
²⁹ H. Hafermann, C. Jung, S. Brener, M. I. Katsnelson,
A. N. Rubtsov, A. I. Lichtenstein, Europhys. Lett. 85, 27007 (2009).
³⁰ D. J. Singh, L. Nordstrom, Planewaves, Pseudopotentials, and the LAPW Method, (Springer, New
York, 2006).
³¹ P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G. K. H. Madsen, K. Kvasnicka, and
J. Luitz, Wien2K (Karlheinz Schwarz, Technische Univer-sitat Wien, Austria, 2001).
³² S.Y. Savrasov, Phys. Rev. B 54, 16470 (1996).
³³ K. Held et al., Psi-k Newsletter #56 (April 2003), p. 65;
³⁴ A. I. Lichtenstein, M. I. Katsnelson, and G. Kotliar,in Elec-tron Correlations and Materials
Properties 2, ed. A. Gonis (Kluwer, NY)[cond-mat/0211076].
³⁵ E. Pavarini, S. Biermann, A. Poteryaev, A. I. Lichtenstein,
A. Georges, and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 176403 (2004).
³⁶ L.V. Pourovskii, B. Amadon, S. Biermann, A. Georges, Phys. Rev. B 76, 235101 (2007).
³⁷ Dm. Korotin, A. V. Kozhevnikov, S. L. Skornyakov, I. Leonov, N. Binggeli, V. I. Anisimov, G.
Trimarchi, The European Physical Journal B 65, 1, 91-98 (2008).
³⁸ N. Marzari and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 56, 12847 (1997).
³⁹ P. Novak, Program QTL - technical report, part of the Wien2K-code documentation.
⁴⁰ A.B. Shick, A.I. Liechtenstein, W.E. Pickett, Phys. Rev. B 60, 10763 (1999).
⁴¹ F. Aryasetiawan, K. Karlsson, O. Jepsen, U. Schonberger, Phys. Rev. B 74, 125106 (2006).
⁴² R. D. Cowan, The Theory of Atomic Structure and Spectra (Univ. California Press, Berkeley,
1981).
⁴³ L.D. Marks, and D.R. Luke, Phys. Rev. B 78, 075114 (2008).
⁴⁴ Ph. Lambin and J. P. Vigneron, Phys. Rev. B 29, 3430 (1984).
⁴⁵ A. Khurana, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64 1990.
⁴⁶ K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, arXiv:0907.0192.
⁴⁷ H. Keiter and J.C. Kimball, Int. J. Magn. 1, 233, (1971).
⁴⁸ N. Grewe and H. Keiter, Phys. Rev. B 24, 4420 (1981).
⁴⁹ Y. Kuramoto, Z. Phys. B 53, 37 (1983).
⁵⁰ N. Grewe, Z. Phys. B 53, 271 (1983).
⁵¹ H. Keiter and G. Morandi, Phys. Rep. 109, 227 (1984).
⁵² P. Coleman, Phys. Rev. B 29, 3035 (1984).
⁵³ N. E. Bickers, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 845 (1987).
⁵⁴ Th. Pruschke and N. Grewe, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter 74, 439 (1989).
⁵⁵ J. Kroha, P. Wo¨lfle, and T. A. Costi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 261 (1997).
⁵⁶ N. Grewe, S. Schmitt, T. Jabben, F.B. Anders, J. Phys.: Condens Matter 20, 365217 (2008).
⁵⁷ J. H. Shim, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Nature 446, 513 (2007).
⁵⁸ J.H. Shim, K. Haule and G. Kotliar, Science 318, 1615 (2007).
⁵⁹ C. A. Marianetti, K. Haule, G. Kotliar, and M.J. Fluss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 056403 (2008).
⁶⁰ E. Gull, P. Werner, A. Millis, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. B 76, 235123 (2007).
⁶¹ N. Prokof’ev, B. Svistunov, Phys. Rev. Lett 99, 250201 (2007).
⁶² J. Kroha and P. Wo¨lfle, Acta Phys. Pol. B 29, 3781 (1998).
⁶³ E. Kozik, K. Van Houcke, E. Gull, L. Pollet, N. Prokof’ev,
B. Svistunov, M. Troyer, arXiv:0907.0863v1.
⁶⁴ Cedric Weber, Kristjan Haule, Gabriel Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 78, 134519 (2008).
⁶⁵ Ralf Bulla, Theo Costi, Thomas Pruschke, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 395 (2008).
⁶⁶ R. H. Byrd, P. Lu and J. Nocedal, SIAM Journal on Sci-entific and Statistical Computing, 16,
1190, (1995).
⁶⁷ J. W. van der Eb, A. B. Kuz’menko, and D. van der Marel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3407 (2001).
⁶⁸ J.  W.  Allen,  S.  J.  Oh,  M.  B.  Maple  and
M. S. Torikachvili,Phys. Rev. B 28, 5347 (1983).

33


⁶⁹ J. W. Allen and Richard M. Martin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1106 (1982).
⁷⁰ J. W. Allen, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 74, 34 (2005).
⁷¹ A. K. McMahan, C. Huscroft, R. T. Scalettar, and E. L. Pollock, J. Comput,-Aided Mater. Des. 5,
131 (1998).
⁷² DFT(LMTO)+DMFT results for various correlated materials are collected in a database available at
Europhys. Lett. 53 354, (2001).
⁷⁸ R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, J. D. Thompson, C. Petrovic,
Z. Fisk, P. G. Pagliuso , and J. L. Sarrao, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 5152 (2001).
⁷⁹ H. Shishido, R. Settai, D. Aoli, S. Ikeda, H. Nakawaki, N. Nakamura, T. Iizuka, Y. Inada, K.
Sugiyama, T. Takeuchi,
K. Kindo, T. C. Kobayashi, Y. Haga, H. Harima, Y. Aoki,
\protect\vrulewidth0pthttp://hauleweb.rutgers.edu/database/ T. Namiki, H. Sato, and Y. Nuki, J.
Phys. Soc. Jpn, 71,

.The DFT(LMTO)+DMFT code is available for download
at the same adress. The DFT(Wien2K)+DMFT will be posted at the same address.
⁷³ J. W. Allen, private communication.
⁷⁴ H. Hegger, C. Petrovic, E. G. Moshopoulou, M. F. Hund-ley, J. L. Sarrao, Z. Fisk, and J. D.
Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4986 (2000).
⁷⁵ A. Llobet, J. S. Gardner, E. G. Moshopoulou, J.-
M. Mignot, M. Nicklas, W. Bao, N. O. Moreno,
P. G. Pagliuso, I. N. Goncharenko, J. L. Sarrao, and
J. D. Thompson, Phys. Rev. B 69, 024403 (2004).
⁷⁶ T. Park, F. Ronning, H. Q. Yuan, M. B. Salamon,
R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao and J. D. Thompson, Nature 440, 65 (2006)
⁷⁷ C. Petrovic, R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, P. G. Pagliuso,
M. F. Hundley, J. L. Sarrao, Z. Fisk, and J. D. Thompson,
162 (2002).
⁸⁰ G.-q. Zheng, K. Tanabe, T. Mito, S. Kawasaki, Y. Kitaoka,
D. Aoki, Y. Haga, and Y. Onuki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4664 (2001).
⁸¹ O. M. Dix, A. G. Swartz, and R. J. Zieve, J. Cooley, T.
R. Sayles and M. B. Maple Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 197001 (2009).
⁸² N. Oeschler, P. Gegenwart, M. Lang, R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao, J. D. Thompson, and F.
Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 076402 (2003).
⁸³ L. D. Pham, T. Park, S. Maquilon, J. D. Thompson, and
Z. Fisk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 056404 (2006).
⁸⁴ E. J. Singley, D. N. Basov, E. D. Bauer, and M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev. B 65, 161101(R) (2002).
