Towards an ab initio theory of high-temperature superconductors: a study of multilayer cuprates.
Benjamin Bacq-Labreuil,¹, ², ∗ Benjamin Lacasse,¹ A.-M. S. Tremblay,¹ David S´en´echal,¹ and
Kristjan Haule³
¹D´epartement de physique, Regroupement qu´eb´ecois sur les mat´eriaux de pointe & Institut
quantique, Universit´e de Sherbrooke, 2500 Boul. Universit´e, Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec J1K2R1, Canada
²Universit´e de Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut de Physique et Chimie des Mat´eriaux de Strasbourg, UMR
7504, F-67000 Strasbourg, France ³Center for Materials Theory, Department of Physics & Astronomy,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA
(Dated: March 10, 2025)
Significant progress towards a theory of high-temperature superconductivity in cuprates has been
achieved via the study of effective one- and three-band Hubbard models. Nevertheless,
material-specific predictions, while essential for constructing a comprehensive theory, remain
challenging due to the complex relationship between real materials and the parameters of the
effective models. By combining cluster dynamical mean-field theory and density functional theory in
a charge-self-consistent manner, here we show that the goal of material-specific predictions for
high-temperature superconductors from first principles is within reach. To demonstrate the
capabilities of our ap-proach, we take on the challenge of explaining the remarkable physics of
multilayer cuprates by focusing on the two representative Ca₍₁₊n₎CunO₂nCl₂ and
HgBa₂Ca₍n−₁₎CunO₍₂n₊₂₎ families. We shed light on the microscopic origin of many salient features
of multilayer cuprates, in particular the n-dependence of their superconducting properties. The
growth of Tc from the single- to the tri-layer compounds is here explained by the reduction of the
charge transfer gap and consequently the growth of superexchange J as n increases. The origin of
both is traced to the appearance of low-energy conduction bands reminiscent of standing wave modes
confined within the stack of CuO2 planes. We interpret the ultimate drop of Tc for n ≥ 4 as a
consequence of the inhomogeneous doping between the CuO2 planes, which prevents the emergence of
superconductivity in the inner planes due to their insufficient effective hole doping, as we also
highlight the existence of a minimal doping (4%) required for superconductivity to appear in one of
the planes. We explain material-specific properties such as the larger propensity of
HgBa₂Ca₍n−₁₎CunO₍₂n₊₂₎ to superconduct compared with Ca₍₁₊n₎CunO₂nCl₂. We also find the coexistence
of arcs and pockets observed with pho-toemission, the charge redistribution between copper and
oxygen, and the link to the pseudogap. Our work establishes a framework for comprehensive studies
of high-temperature superconducting cuprates, enables detailed comparisons with experiment, and,
through its ab initio settings, unlocks opportunities for theoretical material design of
high-temperature superconductors.


I. INTRODUCTION

In recent years, significant progress has been made in the description of high-temperature
superconductivity. Cutting-edge experimental and theoretical works have es-tablished clear
relations between superconductivity and a few key physical quantities. The three most important are
the oxygen hole-content [1–9], the charge-transfer gap (CTG) [8, 10–13] and the superexchange
interaction J [8, 11]. Descriptors defined as combinations of physical parameters have also been
proposed [14], but a central question remains open: how are these quantities related to the details
of the high-temperature superconductors’ chemical composition and structure?
At the heart of most theoretical investigations so far are effective models designed to reduce the
number of degrees of freedom to a well-chosen limited set.  This strategy has shown to be very
successful in describing the physics of high-temperature superconductors well be-yond the sole
superconducting phase. In particular, the


∗ benjamin.bacq-labreuil@ipcms.unistra.fr
one- and three-band Hubbard models [15–19] are able to accurately describe many correlated
electronic phe-nomena such as the Mott transition [20–25], the pseudo-gap [23, 26–34], the
high-energy spectral anomalies [35–39], the interplay of charge and spin stripes [40], to name a
few.
Yet, the realistic parameterization of these models re-mains an open issue and difficult task in
general, often making the connection to experimentally studied real ma-terials tenuous. A
representative example is the puta-tive correlation between the superexchange J and
super-conductivity in cuprates. On the one hand, calculations based on the three-band Hubbard model
predict a direct relation between J and the superconducting order pa-rameter [8]. On the other
hand, experiments show that this correlation seems confined to only a subset of materi-als, and
several outliers are clearly outside the trend (see Fig. 4(d) of Ref. 11). In short, at this stage
the most ad-vanced model calculations cannot explain the existence of materials sharing similar J
but displaying markedly dif-ferent critical temperature Tc. Therefore, it is crucial to develop
novel methods able to perform material-specific estimations of the superconducting properties and
the

2


aforementioned key quantities.
Density functional theory (DFT) is pivotal to address this challenge since it allows to account,
from first princi-ples but approximately, for all electronic degrees of free-dom in a given
compound.  Unfortunately, DFT alone is inherently limited in the calculation of response func-tions
and superconducting properties of strongly corre-lated systems. It must be complemented by
many-body techniques improving the treatment of the few correlated degrees of freedom.
We may distinguish two main philosophies in the re-cent developments. The first consists in using
DFT as a base to parameterize effective single- or three-band mod-els [41–47]. The many-body tools
developed in the con-text of models can thus be used, such as dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT)
[48–51] eventually supplemented with diagrammatic expansions around the DMFT solu-tion [45–47,
52–55]. For instance, the use of DMFT com-bined with the dynamical vertex approximation [45–47]
leads to accurate predictions for the critical temperature of a nickelate compound [45]. Such an
approach is very promising, but it is computationally expensive and may not be easily generalized
to a broader range of materials. Additionally, it lacks the feedback effects on the itiner-ant
degrees of freedom due to the presence of correlated states. Specifically, strong correlations on
the Cu orbitals significantly redistribute charge between the Cu and oxy-gen orbitals, as well as
states in the spacer layers; this shifts the relative positions of these orbitals in the final band
structure.
The second type of approaches avoids the use of ef-fective models and instead retains all degrees
of free-dom explicitly. This has been achieved recently by com-bining DFT with the density-matrix
embedding theory (DMET) [56]. The framework is an ab initio approach that treats the correlations
local to a given cluster at a higher level than DFT, but the local correlations are still treated
approximately. This is closely related to the treatment of the quantum impurity model by the slave
boson-mean field method [57], but applied to a large set of orbitals local to a cluster in space.
The main drawbacks are its restriction to the ground-state, the high computational cost of
including correlations across many different orbitals, and the strong dependence of the DMET
procedure on the DFT starting point, which leads to overly persistent antiferromagnetism as a
function of hole-doping [56].
The complex physics of high-temperature supercon-ductors makes it desirable to develop alternative
theoret-ical methods that offer a complementary perspective to the aforementioned approaches.
Hereby, we present the implementation of a DFT + cluster DMFT (CDMFT) framework that offers the
following advantages to the existing approaches: (i) it treats the correlations local to the
cluster exactly through solving cluster impurity models, (ii) it provides a simultaneous estimation
of the superconducting, spectral, magnetic and electronic prop-erties of a given high-temperature
superconductor, (iii) it
includes the feedback of strong correlations onto the DFT charge density, (iv) it is
computationally cheap enough so as to pave the way towards material-design applications. We extend
the embedded DMFT (eDMFT) formalism of Refs. 58 and 59 to treat cluster impurity problems that are
solved using the exact diagonalization (ED) solver of the PyQCM library [60, 61]. We consider 2  2
plaque-tte clusters to estimate the superconducting order pa-
rameter of a given material, while having a natural ac-cess via DFT+CDMFT to the spectral, magnetic
and electronic properties (criteria (i),(ii)).  Taking advan-tage of the eDMFT formalism, we are
able to perform charge self-consistent DFT+CDMFT calculations (crite-rion (iii)). Finally, our
choice of impurity solver allows a significant computational speedup (criterion (iv)), open-ing the
door to the study of complex strongly-correlated materials.
To demonstrate the new capabilities of the method, we perform an exhaustive study of multilayer
cuprates, a class of high-temperature superconductors which re-mained, to date, hardly accessible
to theoretical ap-proaches. Multilayer cuprates are composed of n-CuO₂-plane stacks, separated from
each other by charge reser-voir layers (see Fig. 1(a)). It is essentially the latter that are
material-specific.
The hallmark feature of multilayer cuprates is the universal n-dependence of the superconducting
critical temperature Tc: it is often maximum for the tri-layer (n = 3) compounds [62]. The
tri-layer nHBCCO even yields the record of Tc at ambient pressure among all known superconductors
[63, 64]. Moreover, the inner CuO₂ planes are protected from inhomogeneity and dis-order [62, 65,
66], allowing the direct observation of Fermi pockets and the opening of the superconducting gap at
low doping [65, 66]. In other words, the inner planes may provide an experimental access to the
intrinsic properties of clean CuO₂ planes. Yet, conceiving effective models capturing the essence
of these materials is an extremely difficult task, since the model needs to take into ac-count the
inter-plane hopping amplitudes, as well as the inhomogeneous hole-doping between the inner and the
outer planes. Hence, although the multilayer cuprates host a number of mysteries that may crucially
impact our understanding of high-temperature superconductiv-ity, there is a real lack of
theoretical insight on the mi-croscopic origins of these phenomena.
We present a detailed theoretical analysis of the physics of multilayer cuprates, focusing on the
single-(n = 1) to the five-layer (n = 5) compounds of two different families, namely,
Ca₍n₊₁₎CunO₂nCl₂ (nCCOC), and HgBa₂Ca₍n−₁₎CunO₍₂n₊₂₎ (nHBCCO). Their crys-tal structures are
illustrated in Fig. 1(a). We provide a comprehensive description of the spectral, magnetic, and
electronic properties of both undoped and hole-doped materials, examining both the normal and
superconduct-ing phases.
For the undoped compounds, we show that the n-dependence of the charge transfer gap (CTG) observed

3


experimentally [13] can be accurately accounted for by our approach, and we identify its
microscopic origin. We show that the CTG in multilayer cuprates is reduced by the first low-energy
conduction states, appearing for n   2, which are confined within the CuO₂ planes, and can be
understood as standing waves in the n-CuO₂ well potential. Such confinement induces a smaller CTG
in the inner planes in comparison to the outer planes. The n-dependence of the CTG directly affects
the value of the superexchange J and thus explains why antiferromag-netism is stronger in the inner
planes [62, 65, 67]. We emphasize that this is intrinsically rooted in the physics of the clean,
undoped multilayer compounds.
Furthermore, by emulating hole-doping using the vir-tual crystal approximation (VCA) [68], we track
the evo-lution of the materials’ properties from the under-doped to the over-doped regime.  In
agreement with experi-ments [69–71], we show that the transformation of the spectral function is
twofold.  At very low doping there is essentially only a chemical potential shift, which then
combines with a spectral weight reconfiguration as more holes are introduced. We show that the
redistribution of charge carriers in the structure upon hole-doping is very non-trivial, and that
the effective hole-content of the in-ner CuO₂ planes may saturate due to the interplay with other
degrees of freedom.
Most importantly, we estimate the superconducting or-der parameter of each compound at all values
of dop-ing, and show that superconductivity does not emerge in the inner planes for n   4 until the
outer planes are overdoped. We find a strong link between the nor-mal state spectral properties and
the superconducting order parameter. Superconductivity disappears in the under-doped and over-doped
regions when the normal-state spectral function looses its double-peak, pseudogap-like feature in
the vicinity of the Fermi level. This ex-plains why the superconducting order parameter vanishes in
the inner planes for n   4: the effective normal-state hole-doping remains below a critical
threshold of approximately 4%, in remarkable agreement with experi-ments [66]. The tri-layer (n =
3) compounds thus appear to be the best compromise between (i) hosting protected inner planes, and
(ii) reaching sufficient doping for su-perconductivity to emerge in every plane.
This work presents a comprehensive theoretical de-scription of both the universal and
material-specific char-acteristics of multilayer cuprates.  The use of an ED solver is essential,
as it significantly reduces the computa-tional cost associated with solving the CDMFT impurity
problem. Thus, our work provides ab initio predictions of high-temperature superconductivity,
paving the way for the theoretical design of superconducting materials.


Organization of the paper

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we present our methodology. We then discuss our
results concern-
ing the undoped multilayer cuprates in Sec. III. The evo-lution of the physics upon hole-doping is
presented in Sec. IV. Finally, we conclude our work in Sec. V.
For a quick overview of the main results, we recom-mend reading the introduction (Sec. I), the
brief re-sults summaries in Sec. III A (undoped compounds) and Sec.IV A (hole-doped compounds), as
well as the conclu-sion (Sec. V). Moreover, to ease the reading of the results sections, we divided
each subsection into thematic groups of paragraphs that may be read independently.


II. METHODS

In the following, we first describe the crystal struc-tures used in this study, as well as how
hole-doping is implemented (Sec. II A). We then detail the generaliza-tion of the charge
self-consistent DFT+eDMFT approach to clusters (Sec. II B), and the use of the ED solver (Sec. II
C). Finally, we present our approach to estimate the superconducting properties (Sec. II D), and
summa-rize the computational details (Sec. II E).


A. Crystal structures, hole-doping

In this study we focus on  two  multilayer cuprate families:  Can₊₁CunO₂nCl₂ (nCCOC), and
HgBa₂Ca₍n−₁₎CunO₍₂n₊₂₎ (nHBCCO), see Fig. 1(a). The Hg-based compounds have been synthesized and
studied experimentally up to n = 16 [72–75].  For our calculations, we used the n = 1, 2, 3
experimental structure parameters of Ref. 72 to be consistent with previous theoretical
investigations [10, 76]. The n = 4, 5 ones were determined using the linear scaling of the lattice
parameter c vs. n [74, 75], while the a and b parameters remain constant for n  3 [62]. To the best
of our knowledge, the nCCOC family could be synthesized up to n = 2 [77–81]. We used the
experi-mental structures for the n = 1, 2, and constructed the n = 3, 4, 5 structures based on the
simple linear scaling c vs. n and the distance between the two CuO₂ planes in the bi-layer
compound.
We performed DFT+CDMFT calculations with 2
2 supercells.  The P 4/mmm space group of the nHBCCO compounds is not affected by the supercell
con-struction. This is however different for the nCCOC fam-ily, whose I4/mmm space-group reduces to
P 4/mmm in the supercell. From the practical point of view, this means that the number of atoms to
be considered in the calculation is multiplied by 8 instead of 4. The num-ber of atoms would thus
reach  180 for n = 5, while our current DFT+CDMFT implementation can reason-ably be carried on unit
cells with up to  100 atoms. To prevent this additional factor of 2, we simplified the nCCOC
structures as sketched in Fig. 1(b): the stag-gered stacking of the Cl-Ca-nCuO-Ca-Cl blocks is
trans-formed in the original cell to obtain a vertical stacking

4

a)                         b)                      c)
2
4
OP




n=5

IP1 IP0 IP1 OP


d




I4/mmm



d




P4/mmm
1     3



 dz²




dx²-y²

O  Cl  Cu  Hg  Ca   Ba

FIG. 1. (a) Representative crystal structures for the multilayer cuprate families nCCOC (left ) and
nHBCCO (right ), for n = 5. The outer planes (OP), and the two possible types of inner planes (IP1,
IP0) are highlighted. (b) Simplification of the nCCOC crystal structures, transforming the
staggered Cl-nCaCuO-Cl stacking (I4/mmm) into a vertical stacking (P 4/mmm), keeping the Cl-Cl
distance d fixed. (c) Illustration of the two impurity problems solved for each non-equivalent CuO2
plane: a 2 × 2 plaquette of Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbitals, and a two-orbital single-site including the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals (see text for further details).


P 4/mmm structure, keeping the Cl  Cl distance con-stant. Although this may appear as a crude
approxima-tion, we show in App. A that the low-energy properties in a range of  3 eV around the
Fermi level is unaffected by the structural approximation at the level of DFT and beyond.


The two multilayer families require hole-doping to be-come superconducting. nCCOC is usually doped
by sub-stituting Ca by Na or vacancies [77–80]. nHBCCO, in contrast, is doped by oxygen insertion
within the Hg planes [72–75]. Treating explicitly these atomic substi-tutions/insertions is
expensive from the theoretical point of view since large relaxed supercells must be considered,
which is beyond the scope of this study. We adopt a sim-plified procedure by using the Virtual
Crystal Approxi-mation (VCA) [68]: holes are introduced in the structure by lowering the atomic
number Z of specific elements to a non-integer value. For the nHBCCO compounds we apply the VCA to
the Hg atoms, as if O atoms were inserted in the Hg planes. The nCCOC structures are doped by
applying the VCA to the outer Ca atoms, to mimic the usual doping of multilayer cuprates, which is
restricted to the charge reservoir layers. This last point is key: the maximum number of holes that
can be intro-duced in the structure is the same for all n since it only depends on the doping
capacity of the charge reservoir layers. We thus always introduce the same number of holes δtₒt =
(10, 20, 30, 40, 50)% independently of n, and let them redistribute over the different CuO₂ planes,
as it happens in the real compounds. We detail in App. B how we estimate the portion of these holes
that end up populating each CuO₂ plane.
B. Embedded cluster dynamical mean-field theory

Within DFT, the full many-body crystal Hamiltonian is mapped to the effective one-body Kohn-Sham
(KS) Hamiltonian which mimics the charge density of the for-mer [82, 83]. The mapping consists in
representing the two-body interactions via the so-called exchange correla-tion energy functional
Eₓc, and is in principle exact for the ground state properties. In practice, the exact Eₓc is
unknown and approximations are made, most commonly by mapping each point in the material to an
auxiliary uniform electron gas problem at the same charge den-sity. Consequently correlations local
to a point in 3D space are accounted for by the local density approxima-tion (LDA) [83], and
correlations in the immediate vicin-ity of each point in 3D space by the generalized gradient
approximation (GGA) [84]. Longer range exchange and correlations are ignored. Both LDA and GGA face
limi-tations for describing the electronic and structural prop-erties of strongly correlated
materials, in which locality to a site in the lattice is required at the minimum. These correlated
degrees of freedom often live on orbitals span-ning a narrow energy range in momentum space, and
cor-responding to d or f orbitals of an ion in real space. Their markedly local character in real
space can be efficiently captured by complementing DFT with DMFT [58, 85–88], in which exchange and
correlations local to a given site are accounted for exactly.
Our approach is based on the DFT+eDMFT imple-mentation of Refs. 58 and 59, which has been
success-fully applied to a wide range of transition metal oxides and heavy fermions [58, 89–92].
The key concept is that the electronic structure of strongly correlated materials is better
described by the spectral function A(k, ω) and

5


functional of the spectral function, rather than functional of the charge density alone. The
spectral function evalu-ates the probability of adding or removing an electron of
of freedom are treated by the DFT functional Eₓc[ρ]. Second, for the correlated orbitals the DMFT
functional Φ[Glₒcₐl] is added. The total Φ functional is then [86]

energy ω and momentum k, and is defined in the com-plex frequency plane as the discontinuity across
the real
Φ[G] = EVC [ρ] + ΦU [G

local
] − EU [ρ

local].

axis of the one-electron Green’s function:
 1
A(k, ω) = − 2πi [G(k, ω + iη) − G(k, ω − iη)]
G(k, ω) = [ω + µ − Hk − Σ(k, ω)]−¹ ,


(1)
Here one has to subtract the correlations included in both methods, which is the
exchange-correlation energy of the DMFT impurity problem, and is usually called the
double-counting. It is now known exactly [93]. We also marked the functionals with the superscript
VC and

where η is an infinitesimal positive real number, µ is
the chemical potential, Hk is the non-interacting refer-ence Hamiltonian, and Σ(k, ω) is the
self-energy incor-porating the effect of electronic correlations. The latter is a priori unknown,
and is thus approximated within DFT+DMFT. In the following we describe the theoreti-cal formalism
necessary to compute the above quantities, from the fundamental functional formalism to the
prac-tical implementation used in this work.

1. Functional formalism

Within DFT+DMFT, the exchange and correlation range is restricted (truncated) to an ion in the
solid, and most often only to a given set of d (or f ) orbitals that form the narrow set of bands
near the Fermi level. The most appropriate formalism to perform this truncation proceeds from the
Luttinger-Ward functional [86]. Simi-larly to the exchange-correlation functional Eₓc in DFT, the
correlations are here encoded in the Luttinger-Ward functional Φ[G]. It can be shown that the exact
Φ[G] contains the sum of all skeleton Feynman diagrams con-
U , which represents the Coulomb repulsion used in each functional.  The DFT functional depends on
the bare Coulomb repulsion VC only, while the DMFT functional depends on the screened Coulomb
repulsion U , because the non-correlated degrees of freedom (core, semicore and other itinerant
states) screen the repulsion among the correlated orbitals. This screened Coulomb U can be
es-timated by self-consistent constrained DFT+DMFT cal-culations [94].
In the DFT+embedded cluster DMFT method one truncates the range of correlations to a cluster in
real space [86, 95–99], rather than a single site. Since solving a cluster impurity problem with
multiple orbitals is nu-merically very expensive, and because in cuprates only the Cu-dₓ2−y2
orbital crosses the Fermi level, we only
treat the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital with cluster-DMFT, while
the Cu-dz2 is safely treated within single-site DMFT.
To properly construct such an approximation we ex-tremize a Kadanoff-Baym functional Γ[G] of the
Green’s function in position space in which the Luttinger-Ward functional Φ[G] is restricted to
certain local quantities defined below:
Γ[G] = Tr log G − Tr G−¹ − G−¹ G + EVC  [ρ]

structed from the single-particle Green’s function G and
the bare Coulomb interaction. If Φ[G] is simply substi-

+ ΦU
0
[GCu(eg)] − EU
H+xc
[ρCu(eg )]

(2)

tuted by
DMFT
loc
H+xc
loc

+ ΦU
[GCu(x²−y²)] − ΦU
[GCu(x²−y²)],

Φ[G] = EXC[G(r, τ ; r′, τ′)δ(r−r′)δ(τ −τ′)] = EXC[ρ(r)],
CDMFT
plaquette
DMFT
loc

one arrives at the usual DFT equations, but here defined at finite temperature. The interpretation
of the equations is also different. The Kohn-Sham bands are not auxiliary states within the
Luttinger-Ward functional approach,
where  G  and  G₀  are  the  interacting  and  non-interacting Green’s functions, EH₊ₓc[ρ] is the
sum of the Hartree and the exchange-correlation DFT functionals,
ΦDMFT[GCᵘ⁽ᵉᵍ⁾] is the single-site DMFT functional for

but they are physical excitations within the static and
both the Cu-eg
orbitals, while ΦCDMFT
Cu(x²−y²) plaquette

space-restricted approximation of Φ.
Within DMFT, only the Feynman diagrams that are restricted to a given ion in the solid are
considered in Φ[G], so that Φ[G] = Φ[Glₒcₐl], but all topologies and orders of Feynman diagrams are
exactly summed up. By recognizing that the same quantity Φ[Glₒcₐl] appears also in the exact
solution of the corresponding quantum im-purity problem, one can compute this quantity without
explicitly evaluating the diagrams.

2. Functional formalism for DMFT and CDMFT

In combining DFT with DMFT one truncates the range of the functional in two steps. First, all
degrees
the cluster-DMFT functional for the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital.
These orbitals form the correlated subspace. We address
the precise way in which they are defined in a following subsection.
Note that the first line in Eq. (2) gives the usual DFT equations. When the second line is added,
we have standard DFT+eDMFT [58, 59] for the Cu-eg or-bitals, i.e., two-orbital single-site impurity
problem. Fi-nally, the third line adds the nearest-neighbor and the next-nearest-neighbour
correlations on the plaquette, but only for the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital. Note that proper double-counting
always has to be subtracted. In particular, the last term compensates for the fact that the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital is taken into account in both the single-site and in the 2 × 2 plaquette cluster
quantum impurities.

6


3. Extremization of the functional and Dyson’s equation

In the following, we describe in detail the algorithm used to extremize the above functional (Eq.
(2)). We first explain how the extremization can be applied to the re-

stricted Luttinger-Ward functional Φ[GCᵘ⁽ᵉᵍ/ˣ −ʸ ⁾]. To this end, we recall that Γ[G] is a
functional of the Green’s
the following Dyson equation:
δΓ
δG (r′,τ′; r,τ ) = 0
= G−¹(r, τ ; r′, τ′) − G−¹(r, τ ; r′, τ′)
+VH₊ₓc[ρ]δ(r − r )δ(τ − τ )
+    ⟨r|ϕα⟩ (Σ     − V  ) ⟨ϕβ|r ⟩



G(r, τ ; r′, τ′) = −⟨T ψ(r,τ )ψ†(r′,τ′)⟩ ,   (3)
+  Σ  ⟨r|ϕ
CDMFT(x²−y²)   ′



where τ is the time-ordering operator along imaginary time τ, ψ⁽†⁾(r,τ ) the creation
(annihilation) operator in an eigenstate of position and the average . is a quantum mechanical
many-body trace with a density matrix ap-propriate for the grand canonical ensemble but that also



where
−αβΣ∈sites
⟨r|ϕα⟩

DMFT(x²−y²)
αβ
ϕβ|r′⟩
(6)

contains a source field that allows arbitrary variations of the function G (r,τ ; r′,τ′). We do not
write spin indices explicitly to simplify the notation.

VH+xc
δEVC  [ρ]
[ρ] =  H+xc
δρ

(7)

In order to truncate the Luttinger-Ward functional,
DMFT(eg)
δΦU
[GCu(eg)]

one needs to pick a set of local orbitals |ϕα
⟩, which are
Σαβ
=   DMFT  loc
δ(GCu(eg))
(8)

here all centered on Cu atoms. The compact index α (or
β, or γ, or δ) stands for the orbital index L = {l, m},

δEU
loc  βα
[ρCu(eg)]

the spin index, and the atomic position R at which the orbital is centered.
V DC =   H⁺ˣᶜ ˡᵒᶜ   δ(r  r′)δ(τ  τ′)  (9)
δ(ρCu(eg))



The detailed definition of these orbitals in practice
δΦU
[GCu(x²−y²)]

is provided later, and we focus here on the definition
ΣCDMFT(x²−y²) =   CDMFT  plaquette
(10)

γδ
of the local Green’s function to which is restricted the
Cu(x2−y2) plaquette  δγ

(C)DMFT Luttinger-Ward functional:
2  2   δΦU
[GCu(x²−y²)]
ΣDMFT(x −y ) =   DMFT  loc      .   (11)

GY (τ , τ )  ≡ P(G)
αβ         δ(GCu(x2−y2))

= ∫∫ d³r₁d³r₂ ⟨ϕα|r₁⟩ G(r₁, τ₁; r₂, τ₂) ⟨r₂|ϕβ⟩ . (4)

The projection P is performed either on a single-site (X = loc) or cluster of atoms (X =
plaquette), and on the Cu-eg orbitals (Y = eg) or Cu-dₓ2−y2 (Y = x  y ), depending on the
restriction in space and orbital applied to the compound indices (α, β).
Based on this definition (Eq. (4)), we may differentiate the restricted Luttinger-Ward functionals
by considering the following chain rule

The τ, τ′ dependence of the self-energies has not been written explicitly.  The first line Eq. (7)
is the DFT Hartree and exchange-correlation potential, Eq. (8) is the single-site DMFT self-energy
when both eg orbitals are considered in the quantum impurity model, Eq. (9) is the double-counting
for the single-site DMFT calculation with eg orbitals, Eq. (10) is the cluster-DMFT self-energy on
the plaquette for the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital, and Eq. (11) is the single-site DMFT self-energy for
Cu-dₓ2−y2 only.


U
(C)DMFT
[GY ]

4. Dyson’s equation in the Kohn-Sham basis

δG (r,′ τ′; r, τ )
U      Y   Y
=    (C)DMFT  X   X  1  2 βα
δGY (τ₁, τ₂)βα δG (r′, τ′; r, τ )
U      Y
At the stationary point, translational invariance in imaginary time and invariance under
translation by a Bravais lattice vector R can be assumed. The Dyson equation (6) can be solved in
any complete basis. It is

= Σ ⟨r|ϕα
δΦ(C)DMFT[GX ]
⟩ δGY (τ′, τ )  ⟨ϕβ
|r ⟩ .  (5)
convenient to choose the orthonormal Kohn-Sham basis,

αβ       X    βα
which is related to the position basis by a unitary trans-
formation

In principle, the above chain rule should involve the sum over a complete basis of local orbitals.
The (C)DMFT restriction enforces that the derivative of ΦU   [GY ] is non-zero only for the active
correlated subspace.
ψ†(r,τ ) =  c†
k,i
(τ ) ⟨ψk,i |r⟩ ,    (12)

The Kadanoff-Baym functional of Eq. (2) can now eas-
ily be extremized with respect to G (r′τ′; r, τ ), leading to
where c⁽†⁾(τ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator for
the Kohn-Sham state i at pseudo-momentum k and

7


imaginary time τ .  Inserting the above into the equa-tion for the Green’s function (3), one can
write it down in the Kohn-Sham basis:
Σ


5. Construction of the local orbitals

We now detail the construction of the set of active correlated orbitals |ϕα⟩. They are chosen to be
quasi-


Gij(k, τ − τ′) = −⟨Tτ c

k,i
(τ )c†
(τ′)⟩
tin sphere centered at R, with energy chosen to be the
Fermi energy. They are called quasi-atomic since they

= ∫∫ d³rd³r′ ⟨ψk,i|r⟩ G(r, τ ; r′, τ′) ⟨r′|ψk,j⟩  (14)


The Dyson equation can be evaluated by inserting (14) into (6) to get

(G−¹(k, ω))ij = (ω + µ − εki)δij
retain much of the character of atomic orbitals such as shape and angular momentum characteristics,
and they are localized around an atom or atomic center (copper in our case). Yet, in contrast to
purely atomic orbitals, they are influenced by their surroundings and are cut at the muffin-tin
radius. By adding the cubic harmonics YL, we arrive at the following functions:
˜

− γδ∈pΣlaquette
CDMFT(x²−y²)
ψk,i ϕγ Σγδ       (ω) ϕδ ψk,j
⟨r|ϕα⟩ = ul(|r − R|)YL(r − R).
Note again that α is combined index for L, R, and spin. From these functions, we construct our
orthonormal
− Σ ⟨ψk,i|ϕα⟩ (Σ    (ω) − V  ) ⟨ϕβ|ψk,j⟩  correlated orbitals as

αβ        αβ
αβ∈site
Σ   1

+
αβ∈site
⟨ψk,i
|ϕα
DMFT(x²−y²)
Σαβ     (ω) ϕβ
|ψk,j
⟩ , (15)
|ϕα⟩ =
|ϕα′ ⟩
α′

α′,α
(18)


where εki are the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues. They solve the Kohn-Sham problem (−∇2 + Vₑₓt + VH₊ₓc)ψk,i
=
where the overlap is local
Oα,α′ = Σ ⟨ϕ˜α|ψk,i⟩ ⟨ψk,i|ϕ˜α′ ⟩ .    (19)

εki
ψk,i
where V
ext
is the ion potential. Note that G−¹ =
i,k

ω + µ + ²  Vₑₓt. In this form of the Dyson equation, we transition from real to momentum space and
from imaginary time to the real frequency domain.
Solving the above Dyson’s equation (15) requires the knowledge of the self-energies, which are
found from the solution of effective quantum (cluster) impurity prob-lems, the details of which are
provided later. Eq. (15) defines how these local self-energies need to be embedded back into the
complete Kohn-Sham basis using
Here, ψk,i is the complete set of Kohn-Sham orbitals
with band index i, but the sum over bands is restricted to a given energy window.
Note that the overlap matrix O is unity if we sum over the entire range of bands that have finite
overlap with the chosen correlated orbitals ϕα , because ψk,i is a complete basis, and because the
atomic orbitals are orthonormal. However, in practice the sum over i is al-ways truncated. We
choose a very large window of bands (−15eV,15eV), so that very little weight of the relevant


Σij
(k, ω) =  ⟨ψ
α,β

k,i
|ϕα

⟩ Σαβ
(ω) ⟨ϕβ

|ψk,j
⟩ ≡ E(Σ).
(16)
orbitals falls outside, and hence O  1 and ϕ(r)  ϕ(r). Nevertheless, we need to properly normalize
the corre-lated orbitals r ϕk,α so that the local basis is exactly orthonormal, otherwise the
high-frequency tails are inac-

E defines the embedding operation while indices i, j run
over the Kohn-Sham states, and Greek letters α, β over local orbitals. Note that only the
self-energy is embed-ded, not the kinetic energy nor the Hartree and exchange-correlation
potentials, as only the dynamic correlations are approximated as being local to the site or to the
clus-ter of sites.
The projection operation P, defined in Eq. (4), can also be written within the Kohn-Sham basis as

GY (ω)α,β  = P(G)
Y
X   α,β
k
=  ⟨ϕα|ψk,i⟩ Gij(k, ω) ⟨ψk,j|ϕβ⟩ . (17)
k,i,j
curate.
Note also that embedding in eDMFT is very different from Wannier orbital construction, because in
the latter the renormalization by overlap is done at each momen-tum point separately. Since this
overlap may be singluar at some momentum points, a singular value decomposi-tion is required.  By
contrast, in eDMFT, the locality of the overlap ensures that it is never singular, and al-ways
rather close to unity.  Moreover, within eDMFT, the Hilbert space in which the kinetic energy is
repre-sented is spanned by the original Kohn-Sham basis, i.e., it is not truncated as in the
Wannier construction. Hence optimizing Wannier orbitals to faithfully represent bands is not
needed. Consequently, the Coulomb interaction is applied to local orbitals, which are more
localized than maximally localized Wannier orbitals.

8























FIG. 2. Flowchart of the charge self-consistent DFT+CDMFT algorithm. Self-consistency is reached
when both ρ(r) and Σα,β(iωn) are converged. The numbering follows the steps described in the text.
The DFT (CDMFT) subloop is highlighted in green (purple). Note that superconductivity is treated in
a separate post-processing procedure (see Sec. II D).


6. Iterative procedure and hybridization function

The iterative procedure to extremize the Luttinger-Ward functional is illustrated in Fig. 2. It
proceeds in the following way:
Starting point
0. Start with an approximate self-energy of the quan-tum impurity and quantum cluster problems, and
an approximate (often DFT-only) charge density of the solid.
options:  (i) if the self-energy is not converged, jump to step 6; (iii) if the self-energy is
converged, or the maximum number of global iterations is reached, end the calculation.


3. Embed the self-energy following Eq. (16) and solve the Dyson Eq. (15) to obtain the Green’s
function Gij(k, ω), expressed in complete Kohn-Sham ba-sis. Then compute the new valence charge
density ρvₐl(r) of the solid via:

DFT subloop: fixed self-energy (green boxes)

ρval
(r) = 1 Σ Σ ⟨r|ψ


k,i

⟩ Gij

(k, iω) ⟨ψ


k,j

|r⟩ .  (20)

1. Determine the Hartree and exchange-correlation
potential from the new charge density, and obtain the Kohn-Sham potential via
VKS = VH+xc + Vext,

where Vₑₓt contains the ionic potential. Compute also the eDMFT double-counting potential V DC by
integrating the screened exchange-correlation po-tential of the eDMFT charge density over the unit
cell, and project it to the relevant orbitals.
2. Solve the Kohn-Sham problem for its eigen func-tions |ψk,i⟩ and eigen energies εki:
−∇2 + VKS |ψk,i⟩ = εki |ψk,i⟩ ,
which determine the computational basis.
At this stage, if the charge density is not converged, proceed to step 3.  If it is converged there
are two
iω k,ij

The valence contribution to the total energy and the total free energy of the solid is also
computed.
4. Get the total charge density by adding the core contribution
ρ(r) = ρvₐl(r) + ρcₒrₑ(r)
The core contribution to the total energy and total free energy is added.
5. Mix the new charge density with that of previous iterations, compute the total energy and free
energy of the solid. Go back to step 1.
CDMFT subloop: fixed charge density (purple boxes)
6. Embed the self-energy following Eq. (16), compute the local Green’s function with Eq. (17), and
solve

9

the Dyson Eq. (15) to obtain the impurity hy-  follows:
bridization functions ∆¯ and the cluster impurity

levels ϵ of each impurity problem via:
Uˆ = 1
2 mα,mβ
Uαββα
†
mα,s
†
mβ ,s′
ϕmβ ,s′
ϕmα,s

∆¯ αβ
(ω) + ϵαβ
= ω − Σαβ
(ω) − G−¹(ω)
.  (21)
s,s′
Σ    †   †

(22)


7. Mix the new hybridization function with the exist-ing one.
+
mα,mβ mα̸=mβ s,s′
Uαβαβϕmα,sϕmβ ,s′ ϕmα,s′ ϕmβ ,s ,


8. Solve the quantum impurity problems to ob-tain new single-site and plaquette self-energies
ΣDMFT(ω) and ΣCDMFT(ω)
where mα/β, s/s′ denote explicitly the orbital and spin indices. The Coulomb matrix elements are
defined by:

k

αβ        γδ
Uαβγδ
=   4πF  Y
2k + 1
lmα
|Ykm
|Ylmδ
⟩ ⟨Y
lmβ
|Ykm
|Ylmγ ⟩ ,

If the number of CDMFT steps for a given charge
density is reached, return to step 3. Else, go back to step 6.


The charge self-consistency is stopped when the charge
m,k

and the Slater integrals Fᵏ are related to more commonly quoted parameters U and JHund by:

F⁰ = U,

density and self-energy are converged. For the sake of readability, we skip here some technical
details such as the method used to find the chemical potential, to in-
F2 = 112 J
13
F⁴ = 70 J
Hund,

.
(23)

tegrate over momentum, etc. The interested reader can
find all these information in the exhaustive descriptions of Refs. 58 and 91. We finally draw
readers’ attention to the fact that the charge self-consistency is performed on the Matsubara axis.
Since the ED solver effectively works at zero temperature, we set a fictitious inverse tempera-ture
β only to define a mesh of Matsubara frequencies.



7. Choice of correlated subspace

In the context of our study of multilayer cuprates, it is sufficient to treat as correlated degrees
of freedom the Cu-
13 Hund

Note that the cluster impurity problem contains only a single orbital per site, therefore terms
beyond Hubbard repulsion do not play an important role in this step.
To avoid the double counting of the local dₓ2−y2 self-energy, we need to subtract the single-site
DMFT self-energy of the dₓ2−y2 orbital (see Eq. (15)), keeping only the cluster impurity
contribution for this orbital which incorporates the the non-local (inter-site) correlations on the
plaquette. For each CuO₂ plane, the self-energy can thus be written as:
Σ =
d12  2  d22  2  d32  2  d42  2  d12  d22  d32  d42

e orbitals, namely d 2
2 and d 2 . The Cu-d 2 orbital
x −y
x −y
x −y
x −y   z   z   z   z

g             x −y     z        z
 Σ(a)
Σ(b)
Σ(b)
Σ(c)
0  0  0  0 

is usually neglected in single- and three-band effective
models. However, in ab-initio calculations, it appears
x2−y2
(b)
x2−y2
Σ(a)
x2−y2
Σ(c)
x2−y2
Σ(b)
0  0  0  0 
relatively close to the Fermi level. As a result in hole     x2−y2  x2−y2  x2−y2  x2−y2
   

(b)

Σ(c)
Σ(a)
Σ(b)
0  0  0  0 

fore, we decided to include it in the correlated subspace.

Σx2−y2 Σx2−y2 Σx2−y2 Σx2−y2   0   0   0   0


field splitting and can thus be treated solely at the DFT
level.
0    0    0    0   0  Σ⁽ᵃ⁾

0  0 

2
lems as depicted in Fig. 1(c): (i) a 2 × 2 cluster of sin-


  0    0    0    0   0   0   0  Σ⁽ᵃ⁾ 
U     Cu(x²−y²)

gle Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbitals (providing ΦCDMFT[Gplaquette ]
in Eq. (2)), and (ii) a two-orbital single-site impu-rity problem involving both dₓ2−y2 and dz2
(providing

(24)
in the dⁱ } basis where i = 1, . . . , 4 are the cluster sites

treatment of the dz2 orbital by taking into account the
notes the orbital. The Σ⁽ᵃ⁾, Σ⁽ᵇ⁾ and Σ⁽ᶜ⁾ are respectively
L   L     L

Coulomb interaction with dₓ2−y2 .
We use the Slater form of the Coulomb repulsion as
the local, nearest-neighbour and next-nearest-neighbour components.

10


8. Double counting

The  double-counting  V DC(r)  is  the  Hartree  and exchange-correlation potential of the impurity
prob-lem [93], and is local to a point in 3D space. Since the local orbitals ϕα(r) are localized
within the muffin-tin sphere of the correlated atom centered at R, and since we
remains the same as in DFT+eDMFT and has no inter-site terms. Thereby, the double-counting per CuO₂
plane
in the studies of alloys [100]. Here we only periodize the Green’s function projected on the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 cluster. The projection allows to use the standard Green’s func-tion periodization
developed in the context of effective models [97, 98, 101–103]:
G  (k˜, ω) =  1  Σ e−ⁱᵏ˜(R−R′)Gˣ2−y2 (k, ω),  (27)

where NC is the number of cluster sites and k˜ is the

may be written as:
V DC =
DC
x2−y2
DC


0   0   0   0  
momentum in the primitive BZ, while k is momentum in the BZ corresponding to the supercell.
Gpₑr(k˜, z) is the
periodized quantity expressed in the primitive BZ. The projected Green’s function Gˣ2−y2 (k, ω) in
the supercell
BZ may be obtained from:
0  Vx2−y2   0    0   0   0   0   0

0   0  V DC
0   0   0   0   0       2  2
Σ  2  2                2  2

x2−y2
DC
x2−y2
0    0    0    0

0   0   0   0
DC  0   0   0   ,

Gˣ −ʸ (k, ω) =

i,j
⟨ϕR  |ψ
k,i
⟩ Gij
(k, ω) ⟨ψ
k,j
|ϕR′  ⟩ .
(28)

0    0    0    0

DC           We chose to periodize the Green’s function instead of

0    0    0    0
  0    0    0    0


where the individual V DC
0  0  V DC
0   0   0  V DC
(25)
components are evaluated
the cumulant or the self-energy since we are interested in the momentum-resolved spectral function
(i.e. the imag-inary part of the Green’s function). In this way, the periodization approximation is
carried after the neces-sary matrix inversions so as to avoid the emergence of in-tractable errors
[103]. Moreover, since the Cu-dₓ2−y2 or-

using the exact double-counting scheme of Ref. 93.
This method involves the evaluation of the exchange-correlation energy of the homogeneous electron
gas with a screened interaction VDMFT(r, r′), representing the screened local Hubbard U and Hunds
interaction JHund used within the impurity problems. VDMFT(r, r′) can be modeled in various ways,
and is implemented in practice as a mixture of Yukawa and dielectric screening [93]:
e−λ|r−r′|
bital is the leading contribution to the spectral weight close to the Fermi level, the additional
projection is not a limitation. The strong Cu-O covalency ensures that the spectral weight of the
oxygen closely follows that of copper.

C. Exact diagonalization impurity solver

VDMFT(r, r′) =
ϵ|r − r′|
,      (26)
We have integrated the ED solver of the PyQCM li-brary [60, 61] into the DFT+CDMFT implementation

where λ and ϵ are constants that can be uniquely deter-mined from the value of U and JHund. Since
the undoped nCCOC compounds are insulating the Yukawa screening should be negligible, and we hence
model it by dielectric screening only (set λ = 0). In all other calculations in which the system is
metallic we use the mixed dielectric
described above. As input, the solver receives the im-purity hopping matrix Tˆ, the interaction Vˆ
tensor, and the impurity hybridization function ∆¯ αβ (iωn). A set of discrete bath orbitals is
optimized by minimizing the dis-
tance between the impurity and discretized hybridization
∆αβ:

and Yukawa screening representation.
d =  W (iωn
n
)|∆¯

αβ(iωn

∗
) − ∆αβ
(iωn
)|2


(29)

9. Periodization

A well-known drawback of the real-space cluster ap-
∆αβ
(iωn) =
b
θαbθβb
,
iωn − ϵb

proach is that it breaks translational symmetry [86, 97, 98]. However, during charge
self-consistent calculations, this does not pose a problem, as we work directly within the
superlattice Brillouin zone. Once the DFT+CDMFT procedure has converged, accessing
momentum-resolved observables in the original Brillouin zone requires a peri-odization procedure.
In our approach we avoid the complications arising from unfolding the full band structure, as is
done, e.g.,
where θ, ϵ is the set of bath hoppings and energies pa-rameters, and W (iωn) is a weight function.
The op-timization is carried out using a Matsubara frequency mesh at a given fictitious inverse
temperature β, which is also used throughout the DFT+CDMFT calculation. We emphasize that the ED
solver nevertheless works at zero-temperature.
Different types of weight functions have been pro-posed [27, 102, 104, 105], but we found that
different

11


variations did not improve significantly our results. We thus adopted a simple cutoff version:
enable direct treatment of the infinite bath and predic-tion of transition temperatures - unlike
zero temperature ED - it is hindered by a severe sign problem in the so-

W (iωn
) = 1 if ωn < ωc
0 else
.    (30)
called covalent regime of three-band models [8].  This regime typically corresponds to the
conditions encoun-tered in our first-principles calculations, making CTQMC

The cutoff frequency is typically chosen to be ωc  10 15 eV.
In order to accelerate the calculations of the quantum cluster impurity problem, the bath geometry
is designed to exploit the symmetries of the 2  2 cluster. We followed the prescriptions of Ref.
[106] in which a general 8-orbital bath geometry was proposed (2 bath orbitals per irre-ducible
representation of the cluster’s point group). The advantages of this geometry are twofold: not only
does it accelerate the computations, but it also improves the es-timation of the superconducting
properties [8, 106, 107]. The bath optimization results in the following impurity
Hamiltonian:
Hˆimp = Tˆ + Vˆ + Hˆhyb [θ, ϵ] .     (31)
The ground-state is determined via the Lanczos algo-rithm, and then used to compute the impurity
Green’s function using the band Lanczos approach [108].  The impurity self-energy needed to carry
the DFT+CDMFT self-consistency is then obtained via the Dyson equation. Details about how these
steps are implemented in prac-tice within PyQCM may be found in Ref. 60.
The impurity function ∆¯ αβ (ω) contains the hybridiza-
tion amplitude between the correlated orbitals and all other degrees of freedom in the crystal. One
may thus wonder to which extent a discrete set of 8 bath orbitals may faithfully account for the
physics at play.  Yet, in all our calculations the discrepancy between the lat-tice and impurity
occupation of the correlated subspace per Cu atom is of the order 10−³ once convergence is
achieved. This level of agreement is attainable because, as noted in Sec. II B 6, the charge
self-consistency is car-
unsuitable for this work. A further consideration is the computational efficiency required for
solving the impu-rity problem. The unmatched speed of ED is essential for studying large
supercells, such as those present in the n = 4, 5 nCCOC and nHBCCO compounds.


D. Effective model for superconductivity

The superconducting gap in cuprates is usually of the order of  50 meV [66, 113]. Hence the typical
energy scale associated with superconductivity is much smaller than any other energy scale involved
in our calcula-tions. In particular, the opening of such a small gap in the spectral function
should not significantly affect the charge density. Therefore, we estimate the superconduct-ing
properties in a post-processing CDMFT calculation where all degrees of freedom but the dₓ2−y2
orbitals are being frozen, i.e., are kept in the normal state.
We reduce the computational burden by fixing the pro-jector between the Kohn-Sham and the local
basis. As such, one may construct a generalized single-band model in which the non-interacting
dispersion εk is replaced by a retarded dispersion Γ(k, ω) which encodes the effect of all other
degrees of freedom in the crystal.  This is a direct generalization of the usual procedure used in
the CDMFT studies of three-band models, in which the non-interacting oxygen degrees of freedom are
integrated out [8, 107].
The retarded dispersion Γ(k, z) is defined via the fol-lowing ansatz:
Gαβ(k, ω) = Σ ⟨ϕα|ψk,i⟩ Gij(k, ω) ⟨ψk,j|ϕβ⟩

ried out entirely in Matsubara space. Hence, the dis-
cretized hybridization is accurate enough to ensure a
i,j
(32)
−1

good convergence.  Similar accuracy was also demon-strated for the single-band Hubbard model away
from half-filling solved with 4-site CDMFT, where an accu-racy better than 1% can be reached
already at 2 bath-sites per cluster sites [109]. To further support our ap-proach, we provide in
App. C a comparison between DFT
+ single-site DMFT calculations carried out with ED and a continuous-time Monte Carlo (CTQMC)
solver [110].
A parallel can be drawn with recent advances showing that noisy Green’s function on the imaginary
axis can be accurately represented using a limited set of poles [111]. The information lost due to
the bath discretization would act, to some extent, similarly as the information lost in the noise.
We conclude our discussion of the impurity solver by explaining our decision to use ED rather than
the well-establish CTQMC solvers [112]. While CTQMC would
≡ [ω + µ − Γ(k, ω) − Σ(ω)]αβ ,
where Σ(ω) is the DFT+CDMFT self-energy. By invert-ing the above equation, one may obtain:
Γαβ(k, ω) = ω + µ − Σαβ(ω) − G−¹  (k, ω).  (33)

In this way, the local Green’s function can be computed without having to explicitly construct the
projector’s ma-trix elements which are all encoded in Γαβ(k, ω).
In practice,  Γαβ(k, ω) is computed for the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbitals of the 2  2 cluster, from the
self-energy Σαβ and Green’s function Gαβ converged in the nor-mal state.  To incorporate
superconductivity in the post-processing CDMFT calculation, we use the Nambu formalism as
implemented within the PyQCM pack-age [60, 61]. It amounts to performing a particle-hole

12


transformation of the spin-down operators:
cα = cα,↑ dα  α,↓
Within the {c, d} basis, the self-energy reads:


(34)
E. Computational details

The DFT+CDMFT calculations in the normal state, which involve the DFT package Wien2k [114] and
eDMFT package [58, 59], are carried with 12  12  8 k-grid, using a Matsubara frequency mesh at a
fictitious

Σαβ(ω) =
ⁿ (ω)  Σᵃⁿ (ω)
Σᵃⁿ (ω) −Σⁿ (ω)†
,   (35)
temperature β−¹ = 0.02 eV. For all compounds, we set the local Hubbard interaction to U = 12 eV and
chose


where we distinguish the normal and anomalous part which have to be found self-consistently. Since
all de-grees of freedom but the dₓ2−y2 orbitals are fixed in the normal state, the effective
dispersion Γαβ(k, ω) only con-tains normal components:
tional [84]. In App. E, we provide detailed arguments motivating this choice, as well as a proof
that our con-clusions are robust against variations of U ranging from 10 eV to 14 eV. Within the
two-orbital single-site impu-rity problem, we also use the Hund’s term JHund = 1 eV.


Γαβ(k, ω) =
ⁿ (k, ω)   0
0   −Γⁿ (k, ω)†

.   (36)
We compute observables on the real frequency axis only when charge self-consistency is reached.
Since the ED solver evaluates the impurity Green’s function from

The latter remains constant during the self-consistency. However, breaking the U (1) symmetry is
allowed in the bath in a self-consistent way.
The key output of this last CDMFT calculation is the value of the superconducting order parameter
mSC. It is computed as the expectation of the following operator:
ˆ   1 " Σ  †  †   †  †
the Lehmann representation, we have a direct access to real-frequency observables without relying
on analytic continuation. Real frequency spectral functions and den-sity of states (DOS) are
computed with an additional broadening of 0.1 eV. The broadening is used only for data
visualization and does not affect our conclusions in any way. Finally, for the final
post-processing estima-tion of the superconducting order parameter we compute

DSC = 2

⟨ij⟩x
di↑dj↓ − di↓dj↑

Σ
Γαβ(k, ω) on the same Matsubara frequency mesh and on
a 16  16  4 k-grid. We checked that changing the ficti-
#     tious temperature and the number of momentum points

i↑ j↓
⟨ij⟩y
i↓ j↑
Preparation of the crystal structures and visualisation of the charge density differences were
carried out with

where ⟨ij⟩ₓ (⟨ij⟩y) denotes nearest-neighbour Cu sites
VESTA [115] software.
along the x (y) direction, and d† is the electron creation

operator on the dₓ2−y2 orbital on site i with spin σ.
In this article, we compute mSC for every non-
equivalent CuO₂ plane in the compound separately, and thus ignore proximity effects between
neighbouring planes. We checked that such effects are small and do not affect our conclusions, as
described in App. D. To ensure the robustness of the mSC prediction, we perform two post-processing
procedures: (i) a two-step process in which we first converge the CDMFT calculation with a 100 meV
static pairing field, and then re-converge af-ter turning it off; (ii) a single-step process in
which no pairing field is applied and superconductivity emerges self-consistently from the normal
state. In most cases, at values of doping where superconductivity is either well established or
undoubtedly vanishing, the two pro-cedures lead to the same mSC (the mismatch is smaller than
10−⁴). In the under-doped (over-doped) doping re-gion where superconductivity is at the verge of
emerging (vanishing), the two estimations may differ markedly. In such cases, the order parameter
is taken from another two-step procedure in which we first apply 1 meV static pairing field. This
uncertainty in the transition regions is related to the discretized bath used in the ED solver, and
can even be traced back to instabilities in the normal state solution at these values of doping.
III. RESULTS: UNDOPED MULTILAYER CUPRATES

Key quantities such as the CTG and the effective su-perexchange J, which have been shown to be
related to superconductivity [8, 10–13], can be accessed from the electronic structure of the
parent compounds.  It has been shown experimentally that the CTG in the Bi-based multilayer
cuprates has a very similar n-dependence as Tc [13], and signs of this dependence have also been
ob-served in the nCCOC family [81]. Yet, to this date, the universality of the CTG vs. n relation
is not fully estab-lished and, most importantly, the physical origin remains elusive. Another
pivotal question deals with the value of the superexchange J, which may be modulated with n since
it is expected to be inversely proportional to the CTG.
The n-dependent physics of multilayer cuprates is usu-ally conceived to be caused by the uneven
hole-doping and the related inhomogeneities between non-equivalent CuO₂ outer and inner planes.
These arguments are mainly hand-wavy, and would especially not hold when considering the undoped
compounds.  Therefore, we first study the undoped (stoichiometric) nCCOC and

13


nHBCCO. We will show that this n-dependence is rooted in the intrinsic physics of the clean parent
compounds. The comparative study of two families allows moreover to distinguish between the
universal and material-specific trends in multilayer cuprates.
We start this section by a short summary of the main results (Sec. III A). Then, we detail the
analysis of nCCOC, whose simplicity enables us to describe the origin of the n-dependent physics
(Sec. III B). We then present in Sec. III C the nHBCCO family, a more com-plex example due to the
self-doping induced by the Hg and apical O atoms.


A. Brief summary of the undoped results

We find several hallmarks of universality in the physics of the multilayer cuprates with respect to
the num-ber of consecutive CuO₂ planes, n: i) the CTG is de-creasing from n = 1 to n = 3, and is
saturated at n = 5. It is smaller (larger) in the inner (outer) planes (Figs. 4(a),10(a)); ii) the
superexchange J is increasing from n = 1 to n = 3, and it is also saturated at n = 5. In accordance
with CTG, J is larger (smaller) in the inner (outer) planes (Figs. 4(b),10(b)); iii) the carrier
distribu-tion between the Cu-d and O-p orbitals is also changing with n, and larger number of CuO₂
planes typically leads to more holes on oxygen (more mixed valent Cu ion), and the inner planes are
most mixed valent (this last point is detailed in App. F, Figs. 27,28). Similar ideas were
phe-nomenologically drawn from understanding the trends in Tc across different multilayer families
[13, 62].
We identify the origin of this strong n-dependent physics as the appearance of standing wave modes,
con-fined in real space between the n CuO₂ planes, and in energy space as the low-energy conduction
bands (Figs. 5,6,7). The confinement is directly visible in the DFT-only band structure of the
nCCOC family, and less pronounced in the nHBCCO compounds due to the pres-ence of the self-doping
Hg-O bands.  The effect of the Hg-O states is mostly independent of n, and is mainly responsible
for the quantitative differences observed be-tween the two families. Hence, our study unambiguously
shows that the key parameters relevant for superconduc-tivity such as the CTG, the superexchange J
and the oxygen occupancy [8], are influenced by the properties of the first conduction states
(other than the upper Hub-bard band). Moreover, based on the evidence that the CTG is a key
descriptor for the superconducting order parameter [8, 12], or directly Tc [13], our results are
rem-iniscent of the experimental evidence that different mul-tilayer cuprate families can share the
same universal Tc vs. n trend, while quantitatively differing in the absolute value of Tc [13, 62].
Another important conclusion is that the differentia-tion between outer and inner CuO planes in
multilayer cuprates is intrinsic. It exists prior to the effects of dop-
between the different planes. Moreover, we surprisingly observe in the undoped tri-layer nHBCCO
that the in-ner plane (IP1) captures more holes than the outer plane (OP) as a consequence of
self-doping. This may provide a route towards a more homogeneous doping of multi-layer compounds.
Indeed, we show in Sec. IV that at low dopings the inner plane of the tri-layer nHBCCO is more
efficiently doped than its counterpart in the tri-layer nCCOC.
It is remarkable that the states participating in the n-dependence of the multilayer cuprates’
physics display salient features of a confined two-dimensional electron gas.  In other words, we
find evidence of states in a bulk system that behave as in a thin film.  This sug-gests that model
Hamiltonian approaches would require the Hubbard U to be a strong function of n, as it is well
known for thin films that the electronic screening de-pends strongly on the system’s thickness. One
may also engineer the first conduction states by using thin films and heterostructures to tune the
CTG and J to poten-tially improve the superconducting properties. We leave these ideas for future
investigations as they are beyond the scope of the present work.


B.  nCCOC: a pedagogical example

We start our detailed analysis with the nCCOC fam-ily since its electronic structure is simpler,
and therefore easier to understand than nHBCCO. We first present the n-dependence of the CTG and
the superexchange J (Sec. III B 1), and then discuss its physical origin (Sec. III B 2).


1. Charge-transfer gap and superexchange

The CTG is the first key quantity that has a strong effect on superconductivity, and is directly
accessible within DFT+CDMFT. It can also be measured via op-tical spectroscopy [117–120], electron
energy loss spec-troscopy (EELS) [13, 121], and scanning tunneling mis-croscopy (STM) [12, 81]. The
CTG can be understood as the energy necessary to transfer an electron from the ligand atom to the
transition metal, i.e., in the case of cuprates from the O-p to the Cu-d orbitals. In the un-doped
compounds, and in absence of self-doping, the strong electronic correlations open a Mott gap in the
spectra, which is the CTG.

Spectral function analysis
In Fig. 3(a), we show the DOS of nCCOC (n=1–5), projected on the Cu-d and O-p orbitals of the
inner-most CuO₂ plane for a better visibility. For all multi-layer compounds (n), the DOS is
insulating, and we ob-serve a clear reduction of the CTG from the single-layer

ing and disorder which may enhance the differentiation
n=1 CTG
≈ 1.5 eV) to the tri-layer case (∆ⁿ⁼³
≈ 0.9 eV),

14















FIG. 3. (a) Projected DOS on the Cu-d and O-p orbitals of the innermost CuO2 plane of nCCOC
(n=1–5). The chemical potential was shifted in the gap so to align the DOS in the occupied region,
as marked by the black dashed line. The colored dots and gray line in the unoccupied part highlight
the variations of the CTG. (b) Digitized STM measurements from Ref. 81, the chemical potentials
were aligned. (c) Momentum-resolved spectral function projected on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital for n=1–3,
along Γ–X–M–Γ. The purple and orange dashed lines highlight the CTG for the OP and IP1 planes,
respectively. The orange boxes highlight the spin-polaron feature (see text). (d) Comparison
between our calculations and ARPES data from Ref. 116, for the n = 1 nCCOC compound along the Γ − M
path.


which is then stabilized for n  3. Optical conductiv-ity [120] and STM measurements [81] converge
to an es-
a)
1.5

timate of ∆ⁿ⁼¹ ≈ 2.0 eV, which is reduced to 1.5 eV
1.4

for the bi-layer compound [81] (see Fig. 3(b)). The abso-
lute value of these measured gaps should be interpreted with caution, since non-zero (but small)
spectral weight in the optical conductivity spectrum can be observed up to 1.6 eV [120], and STM
measurements of insulators can suffer from the band bending phenomenon [122, 123]. The drop of the
experimentally measured CTG by 0.5 eV from the single- to the bi-layer compound (see Fig. 3(b)) is
nevertheless meaningful, and is well captured by our calculation, which predicts a reduction of 0.3
eV. Our simulations also predict a further reduction of the CTG by another 0.3 eV for the tri-layer
compound. This is also in remarkable agreement with recent STM measurements on insulating n = 1, 2,
3 Bi₂Sr₂Can−₁CunO₂n₊₄₊δ sam-ples [13] showing a similar 0.3 eV drop from the single-to the bi-layer
case, and a further 0.3 eV drop in the tri-layer compound. To the best of our knowledge,
insu-lating samples with four or five layers (n = 4, 5) have not been synthetized yet, which
prevents further comparison to experimental data.
We present in Fig. 3(c) the momentum-resolved spec-tral function, projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2
orbital, along the high symmetry momentum path between Γ = (0, 0), X = (π, 0), and M = (π, π)
points, for n = 1, 2, 3. A typ-

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9


b)
116

114

112

110

108

106

104










1     2     3     4     5
n
OP     IP1     IP0















1     2     3     4     5
n

ical signature of the universal waterfall and kink features in cuprates [35–39] can be seen at the
nodal (π/2, π/2) point in the Γ-M path (highlighted by orange boxes). The low-energy electronic
dispersion is strongly renor-malized and backfolded around the nodal point, which was explained
recently by the formation of spin-polaron,
i.e. electrons heavily dressed by magnons [39]. This pe-culiar shape of the spin-polaron dispersion
is responsible for the emergence of Fermi pockets at low dopings (see Sec. IV B). To further
support our results we present in
FIG. 4. (a) CTG and (b) effective superexchange J estimated for the OP, IP1 and IP0 of nCCOC
(n=1–5).



Fig. 3(d) a comparison between the calculated spectral function and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements from Ref. 116, for the single-layer nCCOC compound along the Γ  M
path. We find an excellent agreement of the renormalized spin-polaron

15


dispersion. This highlights that our cluster impurity al-lows to capture precisely the low energy
electronic prop-erties of cuprate superconductors. To improve the cor-respondence with experiment
for the high-energy disper-sion between -1.5 and -2.0 eV, larger impurity clusters should be used
[39].

Charge-transfer gap vs. n
It can be clearly seen in Fig. 3(c) that the CTG is a strong function of the number consecutive
CuO₂ planes (n), and that different planes experience different CTG. In the OP, the gap decreases
from n = 1 to n = 2, and nearly saturates beyond n  2. However, for n  2, the inner planes appear
and yield an even smaller CTG. In other words, the effective electronic interactions felt by the
dₓ2−y2 electrons is reduced with increasing n.
These results are gathered in Fig. 4(a), where is shown
1.5 times larger that our estimation.  However, we em-phasize that the variations of the estimated
J across the different planes and different compounds are meaningful, and unambiguously show that
intrinsically stronger anti-ferromagnetic fluctuations in the inner planes can be ex-pected,
without any influence from inhomogeneous hole-doping or structural distortions. We also mention
that, in agreement with our calculations, there is experimental evidence that the inner planes host
particularly strong antiferromagnetic correlations [62, 66, 128].

Orbital occupations vs. n
In App. F, we provide an additional analysis of the n-dependence of the orbital occupations. It is
remark-ably similar to the behavior of the CTG. The smaller the CTG, the more mixed-valent is the
occupation of the Cu-dₓ2−y2 /dz2 orbitals. This confirms the interpretation

the CTG (∆ⁿ
) in all CuO₂ planes for all nCCOC com-
of effectively smaller local charge correlations (U ) to the

pounds. The CTG does not change appreciably anymore beyond n = 3, both in the outer and inner
planes.

Superexchange J vs. n
The CTG is not the only descriptor that strongly af-fects superconductivity [8]. Another important
parame-ter is the effective superexchange J, which encapsulates the interaction between spins
localized on neighbouring Cu atoms.  In the localized limit, J is related to the CTG (∆CTG) by J
t² /∆CTG, where tₑff is an effective hopping amplitude between the neighbouring Cu atoms. The
direct correlation between J and the superconduct-ing order parameter predicted theoretically [8]
is partly confirmed by experimental data relating J and Tc [11]. Despite a few outliers, in most
multilayer compounds J correlates with Tc. Hence it is an important quantity to estimate.
Here we compute J from the 2  2 cluster susceptibility at the cluster momentum (π, π) [8, 124]. We
emphasize that this is only a very approximate estimation of J that tends to underestimate it,
because we extract it from the momentum averaged susceptibility, as captured by the small cluster.
To calculate the susceptibility precisely at (π, π) point, one would need the Bethe-Salpether
equa-tion which requires the two particle vertex function [125], a task beyond the current work.
We note that the ab initio DFT+DMET formalism, using 2  2 clusters of Ref. 56, suffers from the
same limitations and accord-ingly predict values of J which are close to ours.
Fig. 4(b) shows our estimated J for all planes and all nCCOC compounds. From the single-layer to
the bi-layer compound, J increases by 6 meV (  50 K). In the three-layer compound, the OP has
almost the same J as the bi-layer, but the IP1 has a J that is 4 meV larger than the OP. We observe
only a slight increase in J in both the outer and inner planes from n = 3 to n = 4 and n = 5. Note
that our estimation of J is somewhat smaller than the values measured experimentally, where for the
n = 1 compound, J was found to be 150 meV [126, 127], hence
benefit of stronger non-local spin correlations (J) when
the CTG is reduced.


2. Quantum confinement of conduction states

Up to now, we have analyzed how the normal state properties of the undoped nCCOC multilayer
cuprates depend on the number of consecutive CuO₂ planes (n). We have shown that the CTG is reduced
with an in-creasing number of planes and that the inner ones have the smallest CTG. These inner
planes also have larger superexchange J, they are more mixed-valent, and the number of holes in the
pₓ orbitals (pointing towards Cu, see App. F) is increased. All these properties are known to be
favorable for superconductivity, but we have not yet presented their microscopic origin.
In the following, we argue that the n-dependence is mostly due to the appearance of additional
conduction bands, which are confined in-between the CuO₂ planes, and limit the size of the charge
gap in the unoccupied part of the spectrum.  This physics can be understood and extracted even from
the DFT band structure.

Single- vs. bi-layer compounds
We first focus on the reduction of the CTG from the single- to the bi-layer nCCOC compounds. They
display similar DFT band structures, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The main difference is the presence of
an additional isolated conduction band for the n = 2 compound, located ap-proximately 1 eV below
the bulk of the other conduction bands. Taking advantage of its isolation, we performed a fit using
maximally localized Wannier orbitals with wan-nier90 [129, 130], which resulted in the orbital
shown in Fig. 5(b). The latter is confined in the interstitial space between the two CuO₂ planes,
with a maximum weight located in between the Cu atoms. Note that this orbital is very extended in
real space, with most of its weight in between the CuO₂ planes. Hence correlations



a)       n=1
8



Wannier fit
16

n=2          b)

6
Ca
4                                            Cu
Cl
2                                            O

0

2
X     M             X     M

FIG. 5. (a) DFT-only band structures for the n = 1, 2 nCCOC. The isolated first conduction state of
the n = 2 compound is fitted with a maximally localized Wannier orbital shown in (b).


on such orbital are weak and should not be affected much by beyond-DFT treatment. This isolated
band reduces the CTG by providing an additional source of hybridiza-tion, thereby enabling more
efficient electron hopping, and by pinning the upper Hubbard band at lower en-ergies.  We note that
these effects are beyond previous model Hamiltonian approaches, such as solving the re-alistic
three-band Hubbard model, which would neglect such conduction states.
Generalization to all n
The above analysis can be generalized to the n  3 compounds. As shown in Fig. 6(a), in analogy with
the n = 2 case we observe n  1 conduction states detached from the bulk of conduction bands. They
are mostly vis-ible at the M point, where they strikingly resemble quan-tum confined states in thin
films [131–134]. Remarkably, at M the n  1 states are separated by a constant energy shift ∆En:
where kz is the original dispersion along z if there was no confinement along this direction, and
Θ(Eⁿ) a correcting phase corresponding to the leakage of the standing wave outside of the well,
which is a priori unknown. If the dis-persion relation kz(Eⁿ) is linear, then the energies of the
modes are inversely proportional to the thickness dn, i.e., Eⁿ ∝ 1/dn, from which Eq. (39) would
directly follow.

Physical interpretation of the first conduction states
The first n  1 conduction states may therefore be seen as standing wave modes confined within the
stack of n CuO₂ planes. To assert this interpretation, we can-not use Eq. (40) directly since Θ(Eⁿ)
is unknown, and the usual empirical formulas used for thin films are not applicable in our context.
Instead, we consider a sim-ple uni-dimensional quantum well with an energy barrier V₀ = 8 eV,
corresponding to the energy of the first con-duction states of the surrounding Cl atoms, which form
the barrier of the well. We assume a linear dispersion

n p+1
= Eⁿ + ∆En
,       (38)
relation kz(E) = αE, where α is the only free parameter that is adjusted so to reproduce the
energies Eⁿ,DFT. For

where p  [1, n  1] is the index of the mode. The energy shifts ∆En₌₃   1.64 eV, ∆En₌₄   1.25 eV,
∆En₌₅ 0.995 eV follow the simple relation:
each n, α is optimized by minimizing the distance
n−1
∆En =  En,DFT − En,QW ,




∆En  ≈ n + 1 ≈ d  ,      (39)
where dn is the thickness of the n-CuO₂-plane stack (taken as the distance between the surrounding
Cl atoms). In analogy with quantum confinement in thin films, the above relation could be
understood from the phase-accumulation model which describes the necessary condition for the
formation of a standing wave in a quan-tum well of thickness dn [132]:
2dnkz(Eⁿ) + Θ(Eⁿ) = 2pπ      (40)
where Eⁿ,QW are the quantum well energies. We obtain αⁿ  [1.125, 1.151], i.e., a relatively stable
value given the simplicity of our toy model. As is usually done in the thin film community, we then
reconstruct the disper-sion kz(E) by plotting all the modes’ energies Eⁿ against
p/dn. Remarkably, all the Eⁿ,QW are in excellent agree-ment with the DFT predicted bands Eⁿ,DFT,
and form a linear relationship, as shown in Fig. 6(b).
This analysis of the nature of the first conduction
states of multilayer cuprates allows to understand the
p     p




a)      n=3
8

6




n=4
8                         8

6                         6




n=5


b)
4.5

4.0
17

DFT at M    Quantum Well fit

4                4                         4

2                2                         2

0                0                         0

2                2                         2
X    M           X    M           X    M

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5
0.05  0.10  0.15  0.20
p/dn

FIG. 6. (a) DFT-only band structures for the n = 3, 4, 5 nCCOC. Black circles correspond to the
energies at M estimated from a simple linear relation with n (Eq. (38), see text). These energies
are plotted in (b) and compared to a fit based on a quantum well toy model.


dependence of the CTG and J with respect to the num-ber of CuO₂ planes and their position in the
structure. Since these standing wave modes are confined within the stack of n CuO₂ planes, the
hybridization with the outer planes is significant only on one side of the plane (towards the
interior), in contrast to the inner planes for which the hybridization is strong on both sides.
Hence, similarly to a surface phenomenon, but here found in a bulk system, the inner planes
hybridize twice as strong as the outer planes with these standing wave modes, which leads to a
reduction of the CTG. We emphasize the generality and importance of this interpretation for
unconventional superconductors in general, since the formation of such conduction states can also
be noticed in multilayer nick-elates [135].


C. nHBCCO: contrast from self-doping

We now turn to the nHBCCO family, and start by presenting the DFT band structure in Fig. 7. In
con-trast to nCCOC, we observe two bands just above the Fermi level for all n, which stem from Hg
and the apical O [136, 137], and are marked by thick lines. For n ≥ 2,
shown in Fig. 8(a). Only the single layer compound is strictly insulating, while the other ones
remain metallic. The Hg-O bands induce a self-doping effect even when correlations in CuO₂ planes
are considered. Surprisingly, the charge gap in the innermost planes remains finite for all
compounds, as seen in Fig. 8(a), which means that the CuO₂ planes are in a selective Mott state in
the parent compound, making multilayer compounds very bad met-als. Note that to ease the visual
comparison, we applied a rigid shift to the n = 1 and n = 5 DOS in Fig. 8(a) to cancel self-doping
effects. Overall, the n-dependence of the DOS is very similar to the STM measurements of Ref. 13
(shown in Fig. 8(b)), which were performed on insulating Bi₂Sr₂Can−₁CunO₂n₊₄₊δ samples.
The CTG is evaluated (without the shift) as the dis-
tance between the Fermi level and the bottom of the up-per Hubbard band (see Fig. 8(c)). The
DFT+CDMFT calculations confirm our anticipation: the CTG is over-all smaller than in the nCCOC
compounds, and the de-pendence on n is less pronounced. The mechanism that leads to the reduction
of the CTG is however the same, as can be seen from the spectral functions displayed in Fig. 8(c).
In the outer plane, the CTG is reduced from n = 1 (∆ⁿ⁼¹ ≈ 0.92 eV) to n = 2 (∆ⁿ⁼² ≈ 0.75 eV)

these bands induce a self-doping effect similar to that ob-served for the Bi-based multilayer
compounds [138–140]. In addition, we notice the emergence of n  1 low-energy conduction bands
(marked by black arrows), which are repelled at energies slightly above the self-doping bands.
Based on the arguments developed previously, we argue that the Hg-O bands cause a reduction of the
CTG in all compounds, including the single layer compound. In addition, the n dependence is weaker
than in nCCOC, be-cause Hg-O bands push the standing wave modes higher up in energy.

Spectral function analysis
The DFT+CDMFT DOS projected onto the Cu-d and O-p orbitals of the innermost CuO₂ plane of nHBCCO is
and then saturates, and is smaller in the inner planes for
n ≥ 3 (∆ⁿ≥³,IP¹ ≈ 0.68 eV).
Effect of self-doping
We also noticed a subtle difference between the tri-layer spectral functions of nCCOC and nHBCCO.
The first valence band of the inner plane in nHBCCO lies closer to the Fermi level than the outer
plane, while in nCCOC it is the opposite.  This is related to the self-doping, which favors
hole-doping of the inner planes rather than the outer ones. We confirm it by showing the Fermi
surface (FS) in Fig. 9(a): the IP1 pocket is indeed larger than that of the OP. The reader
interested in the fact that we obtain Fermi pockets, and not arcs, at low doping levels will find a
detailed discussion in Sec. IV B. As an additional check, we also estimated the doping in

18


6     n=1
n=2
n=3
n=4
n=5

4

2

0

2


4    X   M

X    M         X    M

X    M         X    M

FIG. 7. (a) DFT-only band structures for the n=1–5 nHBCCO. The relative linewidth denotes the
contribution from the Hg and apical O. The black arrows highlight the additional bands that, in
analogy with the nCCOC case, are expected to contribute to the n-dependent behavior.


















FIG. 8. (a) DFT+CDMFT projected DOS on the Cu-d and O-p orbitals of the innermost CuO2 plane of
nHBCCO (n=1–5). The colored dots and gray line in the unoccupied part highlight the variations of
the CTG. To ease the comparison, we align the bottom of the CTG with the Fermi level for the
innermost planes of n = 1 and n = 5 (which otherwise would be below the Fermi level) by applying a
rigid shift in energy. (b) STM measurements digitized from Ref. 13, performed on n = (1, 2, 3)
Bi₂Sr₂Can−₁CunO₂n₊₄₊δ insulating samples. (c) Momentum-resolved spectral function of the Cu-dₓ2−y2
orbital for n = 1, 2, 3, along Γ–X –M–Γ. The purple and orange dashed lines highlight the CTG for
the OP and IP1 planes, respectively.


each layer using the procedure described in App. B. We
where rOP/IP₁ is the distance between the Hg²⁺ plane

obtained δOP
2
≃ 1.5% and δIP¹
≃ 1.9%.
and the outer/inner (Cu²⁺O−²)²− ones.

This result is surprising since one may expect that the self-doping due to the apical O and Hg
atoms would intro-duce more holes in the nearest CuO₂ plane, the OP. We propose a simple
electrostatic picture, shown in Fig. 9(b), from which we argue that the system can minimize its
energy by creating more holes in the IP1 instead of OP. Due to self-doping, a portion of electrons
2δe− has to be transferred to the surrounding Hg²⁺ planes from (one of) the (Cu²⁺O−²)²− planes. The
two possibilities lead to different energy costs, that we denote EOP and EIP₁. Considering the
layers as a collection of point charges, one may find that the difference between the two
ener-gies, at the first order in δ, will scale as

E  − E  ∝ 4e δ  1  −  1   > 0   (41)²
The energy difference is positive: from a purely electro-static point of view, it is advantageous
to screen the posi-tive charge of the Hg²⁺ plane by maximizing the number of electrons in its
vicinity. In other words, it is energet-ically favorable to take the portion 2δ of electrons from
the IP1 which is located further away from the Hg²⁺ plane.
We will show in Sec. IV that this self-doping effect is important for doping and enhancing
superconductivity. Namely, hole-doping in the charge reservoir layers easily increases the hole
concentration in the OP, but much less efficiently in the inner planes. The low concentration of
holes in the inner planes is a strong limiting factor for superconductivity. In contrast to nCCOC,
the intrin-sic self-doping effect in nHBCCO seems to create more


19


a)
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55


b)
















1     2     3     4     5
n
OP     IP1     IP0

118


117


116


115


114

1     2     3     4     5
n


FIG. 9. (a) FS for the n = 3 nHBCCO. (b) Simplified sketch of the charged layers composing the
system. It is favorable to transfer a portion of electrons δe− from IP1 rather than OP to minimize
the electrostatic energy.


trinsically in the inner planes.
FIG. 10. (a) CTG and (b) effective superexchange J esti-mated for the OP, IP1 and IP0 for nHBCCO
(n=1–5). The dashed curves with open symbols in (a) correspond to the case where the bottom of the
CTG is considered to be the top of the Cu-d and O-p Zhang-Rice band instead of the Fermi level
(solid lines full symbols, see text).


Charge transfer gap vs. n
We summarize in Fig. 10(a) the values of the CTG in nHBCCO for each type of CuO₂ planes with
respect
level.


Superexchange J vs. n

to n, as evaluated from the Fermi level (solid lines full symbols). Overall the CTG is smaller than
in nCCOC, and the n-dependence is similar but less pronounced. The evolution of the CTG from n = 1
to n = 3 agrees remarkably well with the STM measurements of Ref. 13 (see Fig. 8(b)), performed on
Bi-based multilayer cuprates. These were insulating parent compounds, ob-tained by performing
chemical substitution to prevent self-doping [13]. We can anticipate the CTG for the case where the
self-doping is removed, by evaluating it from the top of the ZRS band, and not from the Fermi
level. The CTG obtained in this way is shown in Fig. 10(a) (dashed lines empty symbols), and
suggests that the de-pendence on n could be stronger in such insulating ma-terials. In particular,
the tri-layer compound shows a significantly smaller gap, yielding a CTG vs. n profile strikingly
reminiscent of the n-dependence of Tc [13, 62]. We note that this crude prediction may, however,
slightly overestimate the reduction of the CTG since the Hg-O self-doping bands would be shifted
away from the Fermi
We now turn to the superexchange J, which is shown in Fig. 10(b) with respect to the number and
type of consec-utive CuO₂ planes. First, J in nHBCCO is overall larger than in nCCOC compounds,
which is consistent with the smaller CTG. Second, it shows a clear growth with n, as in nCCOC,
consistent with the reduction of the CTG. In contrast to nCCOC, however, the inner planes show
smaller J than outer planes, which seems inconsistent with CTG. This is likely due to limitation of
our method to extract parameter J, which is simply given by (π, π) susceptibility for insulators as
explained in Sec. III B 1. Our method thus most likely underestimate the superex-change in the
metallic n  2 compounds.
The absolute values of J are of correct order of magni-tude, but not directly comparable to
experiments. Our estimated values of J = 114 meV for n = 1 and J = 118 meV for n = 2 are not very
far from experi-mental values of J  135 meV (n = 1) and J  180 meV (n = 2) [11]. Larger discrepancy
for n = 2 as compared to n = 1 is likely due to the fact that n = 2 compound is

20


metallic and our extracted value of J is already screened. Lastly, as mentioned in Sec. III B
similar ab initio ap-proach based on DFT+DMET applied to 2  2 clusters predicts very similar values
of J for the single- and bi-layer nHBCCO compounds [56].


IV. RESULTS: HOLE-DOPED MULTILAYER CUPRATES

We now turn to the analysis of the hole-doped multi-layer cuprates. They are to be thought of as
doped Mott insulators, hence their properties should strongly inherit from the physics of the
parent compounds [105, 141, 142]. This question of inheritance has been mostly studied with
effective models. Therefore, it is important to quantify how each material specificity may
influence the evolution of the electronic properties upon hole-doping.
Another key aspect of the hole-doped multilayer cuprates is the inhomogeneous doping of the CuO₂
planes [62, 65–67].  It is at the source of the obser-vation of Fermi pockets coexisting with arcs
in the FS [65, 66], and it strongly influences the superconduct-ing properties [62, 66]. In
particular, although the inner planes present favorable conditions for superconductivity in terms
of CTG [13], J and homogeneity [62], the small amount of holes that may reach them prevents the
obser-vation of large critical temperatures in these planes [62]. Theoretical insight are crucially
needed to understand better how the doped holes redistribute in the structure, to establish whether
there is a doping threshold for the inner planes or if there are ways to enhance their capacity to
host holes, and finally to study how superconductivity could be stimulated.
In our first principles approach, the doping of each plane is determined self-consistently. We can
control only the total doping of the material. We use the same VCA values for total doping δtₒt =
10, 20, 30, 40 and 50% for all compounds (n = 1, . . . , 5). This allows doping in the different
planes to range from the usual underdoped to optimally-doped and overdoped regimes.
In the following, we start with a short summary of the main results for the hole-doped multilayer
cuprates (Sec. IV A). Then, we investigate the evolution of the spectral properties upon
hole-doping (Sec. IV B), and we analyze how the insertion of charge carriers rearranges the
electron and hole distribution (Sec. IV C). Finally, in Sec. IV D we examine the superconducting
properties and their relation to the normal state described previously.


A. Summary of the hole-doped results

We track the evolution of the spectral properties from the under-doped to the over-doped regimes.
In agree-ment with experimental evidence [69–71], we show that the transformation is twofold (Figs.
11,12): (i) at very low dopings, there is essentially a chemical potential shift;
(ii) above roughly 4% of effective doping, the shift is com-bined with a substantial spectral
weight transfer from the high-energy Hubbard bands to the low-energy features. The experimental
observation of Fermi pockets coexist-ing with arcs in multilayer cuprates [65, 66] is naturally
explained by our calculations (Fig. 13). The inhomoge-neous doping is accurately taken into
account, and lead to situations where the inner planes are in the very under-doped regime, while
the outer planes are close to the op-timal doping. Hence, the spectral function of the inner planes
only undergo the chemical potential shift which promotes the nodal backfolded spin-polaron
dispersion (see Sec. III B 1) to the Fermi level, thus forming pock-ets, while the optimally-doped
outer planes display an arc.
We find that these transformations are universal to the two families studied, but our method also
allows to iden-tify material-specific trends. Namely, the effective doping of the CuO₂ plane in the
single-layer nHBCCO saturates close to optimal doping, while its nCCOC counterpart clearly crosses
the over-doped regime. We emphasize that our method enables to theoretically address ab initio the
key elements of the HTSC spectral function, such as the pseudogap [23, 26–34, 70, 143–147], and the
high-energy
anomalies [35–39, 70, 148–159].
Not only can we track the doping evolution through the spectral properties, we can also directly
map out the carrier redistribution in real space, by virtue of the charge self-consistency. This
allows to visualize and understand precisely how the holes redistribute in the crystal struc-ture
(Figs. 14,15). In particular, we identify two doping regimes in which the different orbitals
involved behave differently. While at low and intermediate doping the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital gain holes
upon doping, its hole-content saturates at large doping while other Cu-d orbitals start to host
holes. Moreover, we show that increasing the hole-content on a given orbital is always compensated
by an additional electronic cloud in the surrounding orbitals, leading to a non-trivial charge
carrier redistribution on the Cu and O atoms. This may provide important in-formation for the
experimental determination of the ef-fective hole-content, using for instance nuclear magnetic
resonance [5, 6, 9].
We estimate the superconducting properties of the multilayer cuprates by computing the
zero-temperature superconducting order parameter mSC (Figs. 16,17). We show that mSC remains zero
until a hole-doping threshold of  4%, in remarkable agreement with experiments [66] (see Fig. 17).
The existence of this doping threshold explains one of our most important finding:  the in-ner
planes of the n   4 compounds do not host su-perconductivity because their effective doping remains
too small (Fig. 17).  This highlights an apparent com-petition between the favorable conditions of
the inner planes (smaller CTG, larger J, protection from inhomo-geneities), and the unfavorable
lack of holes.  In addi-tion to these universal trends, our method can also re-produce the expected
material-specific trends since mSC

21




























FIG. 11.  Momentum-resolved spectral function projected on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital for three values
of total doping
δtot=[10%, 30%, 50%], computed for the single-layer (n = 1) (a) nCCOC and (b) nHBCCO. The estimated
doping in the

OP CuO2
is specified on each panel. The orange boxes and numbered arrows highlight several features
discussed in the text.


is larger in the nHBCCO compounds in comparison to nCCOC (Fig. 16).
Finally, we are able to provide a combined analy-sis of the normal state and superconducting
proper-ties (Figs. 18,19).  We show that for superconductiv-ity to emerge, the normal state DOS
should display a nearly particle-hole symmetric feature in the vicinity ( 200 meV) of the Fermi
level reminescent of a pseudo-gap. Both the emergence and disappearance of supercon-ductivity in
the under-doped and over-doped regimes can be tracked down to this pseudogap-like feature (Fig.
18). Moreover, the superconducting trends may be influenced by material-specific characteristics,
such as the relative energy difference between the Cu-dz2 and dₓ2−y2 orbitals, in agreement with
previous works [160, 161] (Fig. 19). This highlights the need for ab initio methods for
con-structing a more complete theory of high-temperature superconductivity.


B. Evolution of the spectral properties

Upon  doping,  the  spectral  function  of  high-temperature superconductors undergoes major
trans-formations related to key aspects of the electronic properties [39, 66, 69–71, 162–164].
ARPES measure-ments carried on multilayer cuprates have revealed the inhomogeneous doping between
the outer and inner
planes [65, 66, 165], confirming the interpretation of nuclear magnetic resonance and quantum
oscillations measurements  [62,  67].   Fermi  pockets  have  been observed for the first time in
hole-doped multilayer compounds, revealing at the same time that arbitrarily small doping turns the
inner CuO₂ planes metallic [66]. All these intriguing spectral properties of multilayer cuprates
have been seen experimentally, but have not been understood theoretically. While much progress has
been done by studying the doping-dependent properties of  the  one-band  and  three-band  effective
 Hubbard models, these can hardly account for a markedly inho-mogeneous distribution of holes
between adjacent CuO₂ planes.
As described in Sec. II A, we emulate the hole-doping within VCA, with extra charge added to the
outer Ca and Hg atoms, ranging from δtₒt = 10% to δtₒt = 50%, which is sufficient to describe the
main trends observed experimentally. We emphasize that in this study we do not consider the
questions related to the thermodynamics of dopants and defects [166, 167]. Such considerations, and
a more realistic treatment of doping, are kept for future works.
Spectral function of the single-layer compounds
We start with the analysis of the momentum-resolved spectral functions of the single-layer nCCOC
and nHBCCO compounds, projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2 or-bital, as shown in Fig. 11. Note first that
approximately

22




























FIG. 12.  Momentum-resolved spectral function projected on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital for three values
of total doping
δtot=[10%, 30%, 50%], computed for the tri-layer (n = 3) (a) nCCOC and (b) nHBCCO. The estimated
dopings in the OP and
IP1 δOP/IP¹ are specified on each panel. The orange boxes and numbered arrows highlight several
features discussed in the
2
text.

70% of all the inserted holes migrate to the CuO₂ plane,  δtₒt = 50%, the pseudogap in nCCOC closes
(but not in

as shown by the estimated doping δOP
2
(see App. B for
nHBCCO) leaving the Van Hove singularity above the

details about the estimation method). This is in agree-ment with previous ab initio studies using
the VCA and the rigid band approximation [56]. We however observe a stark deviation from this
tendency for the δtₒt = 50% nHBCCO compound: the effective hole-content saturates at a much lower
value than its nCCOC counterpart. Con-sequently, the spectral function remains unchanged be-yond
δtₒt = 30%. The apparent pinning of the Fermi level is due to a substantial shift of the occupied
Hg and apical O bands, which starts to cross the Fermi level at δtₒt = 30%, consistently with
previous findings [137]. Clear evidence of this phenomenon is provided in App. B. We shall come
back to this point later in Sec. IV C, while we now focus on the transformations of the spectral
func-tion.
At low doping δtₒt = 10%, the spectral function re-sembles that of the undoped compounds (see Figs
3,8) to which a rigid chemical potential shift was applied. The backfolded spin-polaron feature at
the nodal point (π/2, π/2) (in the path Γ-M, highlighted by the orange boxes), is promoted to the
Fermi level without major transformation. Moreover, no substantial spectral weight transfer is
noticed above the Fermi level at the anti-nodal (π, 0) point. The transfer is visible at larger
values of dopings, such as δtₒt = 30%, at which the pseudogap is opened in the anti-nodal region
(orange arrows n°1). At
Fermi level (orange arrow n°2).
In short, the spectral function analysis of the n = 1 compounds shows that our method effectively
captures the hole-doping evolution observed experimentally in cuprates. Indeed, the chemical
potential first shifts to-wards the top of the valence band, and upon further dop-ing the spectral
weight is substantially reconfigured while opening the pseudogap [69–71]. Similar spectral
evolu-tion has been seen before in simulating effective models for cuprates [26, 162–164]. Yet, our
method reveals that even these simple single-layer cuprates may display un-expected
material-specific features: the nHBCCO com-pound cannot be easily over-doped and remains in the
pseudogap phase even at high levels of doping due to the Fermi level pinning.

Spectral function of the tri-layer compounds
We now turn to the tri-layer compounds (n = 3) in Fig 12. We inserted the same number of holes δtₒt
in the charge-reservoir layers as before. Since the holes are shared between the three CuO₂ planes,
the effective dop-ing of each plane is expected to be much smaller here, but one would still expect
their sum to be around 70% of nominal doping. Summing over the estimated dopings
δOP/IP¹ however shows that, in total, more holes are ab-
2

23





















FIG. 13. FS projected on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital for the n = 1, 3, 5 (a) nCCOC and (b) nHBCCO. The
total VCA doping is δtot = 30% for the single-layer compound, and δtot = 50% for the n = 3, 5 ones.
The estimated dopings in the OP, IP1 and IP0 δOP,IP1,IP0 are specified on each panel. (c1,2) Fermi
surfaces measured via ARPES on, respectively, n = 5 Ba2Ca4Cu5O10(F,O)2 and n = 3 Bi₂Sr₂Ca₂Cu₃O₁₀₊δ
samples. The two panels were adapted with permission from Refs. 65 and 168.


sorbed within the CuO₂ planes for n = 3, in comparison to n = 1.
At low doping (δtₒt = 10%), the holes are distributed rather uniformly between the planes. The
spin-polaron
nHBCCO (2.8%). We note that from the spectral func-tions alone, we would expect smaller doping
level in the inner plane of nCCOC compound as compared to the one of nHBCCO compound. Our
estimations, however, are

feature is rigidly shifted across the Fermi level (orange
IP1 nCCOC
= 9.9% and δIP¹
= 8.5%, respectively. This

boxes), and no spectral weight transfer is visible at the anti-nodal point. Many of the key
features discussed in the undoped compounds (see Sec. III A) are recogniz-able: (i) the CTG,
measured by the onset of the UHB, is smaller for n = 3 as compared to n = 1, and is mini-mized in
the inner plane, and (ii) the inner plane in the nHBCCO compound contains slightly more holes than
the outer plane, in contrast to nCCOC.
Upon further doping (δtₒt = 30%), the inhomogeneous distribution of holes identified in experiments
[62, 65–67, 165] is clearly accounted for in our calculations. nCCOC does not show significant
spectral weight trans-fer above the Fermi level at the anti-node (at the node it is simply a
consequence of the chemical potential shift), while a weak feature can be identified in all planes
of nHBCCO  (orange arrow n°1). The smaller CTG in nHBCCO may thus be favorable to the spectral
weight transfer upon hole-doping.
Finally, at substantial doping (δtₒt = 50%), where CuO₂ planes are still under-doped, we identify a
spec-tral weight transfer above the Fermi level for all planes in both nCCOC and nHBCCO, with a
clear pseudo-gap feature in the anti-nodal region (orange arrows n°2).  A key difference between
the two families is the difference between the energies of the ZRS band of the IP1 and of the OP
planes:  the energy dis-tance is much larger in nCCOC than in nHBCCO. This translates into a larger
difference between the doping levels in the nCCOC (3.8%) as compared to
apparent discrepancy is related to the method used to es-
timate the doping, a posteriori, which is perturbed by the shift of the Hg and apical O occupied
bands at the Fermi level in nHBCCO at large values of doping (see App. B). Hence we emphasize that
this is not a limitation of our DFT+CDMFT calculations. Indeed, our estimates, the first
theoretical ones, for the doping differentiation be-tween the inner and the outer planes agree
qualitatively with the experimental estimates from nuclear magnetic resonance and quantum
oscillations [62, 67].

Coexistence of Fermi arcs and pockets
A striking consequence of the inhomogeneous doping across different planes is the coexistence of
different FS: arcs and pockets of different sizes, which were recently identified with ARPES
measurements [65, 66, 168] (see Fig. 13(c1,2)). In Fig. 13(a-b) we present the FS obtained from the
momentum-resolved spectral function projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital, for n = 1, 3, 5 nCCOC and
nHBCCO compounds. As expected, the single-layer sys-tems yield a single Fermi arc, which shows a
pseudogap at the antinode. We choose a representative doping of δtₒt = 30%, at which the CuO₂ plane
is slightly over-doped. For three-layer (n = 3) we choose δtₒt = 50%, which makes the outer planes
close to optimal doping, and inner planes under-doped. We see a coexistence of a small and a large
arc for the outer and inner planes, respectively. The calculated Fermi surfaces are in ex-cellent
agreement with ARPES measurements performed

24


a1)
y          y

b1)
y             y



e-

a2)
z



x z         x




b2)
z




x             x
O Hg Cu Ba
z




h+
Cu O
Cl
Ca



x           x
nCCOC
x             x
nHBCCO

FIG. 14. Charge density difference ∆ρ(r) between two different total VCA doping values for the
single-layer (n = 1) (a1-a2) nCCOC and (b1-b2) nHBCCO. Panels (a1),(b1) are top views of the CuO2
OP, while (a2),(b2) are side views of the whole structure.


on n = 3 Bi₂Sr₂Ca₂Cu₃O₁₀₊δ samples [168] and repro-duced in Fig. 13(c2). As discussed above, the
inner arc of nHBCCO is wider than the one of nCCOC, although our estimates for the relative dopings
would suggest oth-erwise. For n = 5, we choose δtₒt = 50%, which again puts the outer plane close
to optimum doping, while the inner planes are heavily under-doped. We observe a coexistence of
Fermi arcs (OP) and pockets (IP1 and IP0), in striking resemblance to the ARPES measure-ments [65,
66], as shown in Fig. 13(c1) in which we repro-duce the Fermi surface of n = 5 Ba₂Ca₄Cu₅O₁₀(F,O)₂
from Ref. 65.



Moreover, we can identify the mechanism behind the transformation from pockets to arcs. In
agreement with the interpretation of Refs. 65 and 66, we find that the Fermi pocket is a
consequence of the strong antiferromag-netic correlations. At very low doping only the chemical
potential shift occurs without major transformation of the spectral function. Hence, the backfolded
spin-polaron dispersion at the nodal point across the antiferromag-netic zone boundary (most
clearly visible in the undoped spectra in Fig. 3,8) survives and yields a closed Fermi pocket. As
doping increases, the bending of the disper-sion disappears and it is pushed away from the Fermi
level, thus transforming the pocket to an arc. At the anti-node, some weak spectral weight appears
due to the incremental filling of the pseudogap.
C. Carrier redistribution

Until now we presented the momentum and energy de-pendence of doping holes in cuprates. However,
the real space reorganization of the holes is also important [5–7, 9], especially since there is a
lack of theoretical insights in this area. In the following, we discuss the redistribu-tion of
charges (both holes and electrons) as a whole in the multilayer cuprates. We show that doping
yields non-trivial phenomena which highlight the complex nature of doping quantum materials [166].

Charge redistribution in the single-layer compounds
In order to understand the doping-dependent redistri-bution of charges, we compute the charge
density differ-ence between two DFT+CDMFT simulations at different doping levels ∆ρˣ−ʸ(r) = ρˣ%(r)
ρʸ%(r). This quantity is displayed in Fig. 14 for the single-layer nCCOC and nHBCCO compounds at
two different levels of doping. At each point in space r, a blue-purple-black (yellow-red-white)
color indicates that there is effectively more holes (electrons) at doping x% as compared to y%,
i.e., ρˣ%(r) ≤ ρʸ%(r) (ρˣ%(r) ≥ ρʸ%(r)).
We first focus on the real space xy cut through the CuO₂ plane and xz cut through the structure of
nCCOC, see Figs. 14(a1) and (a2). In both doping regimes (left and right panels) the charge
carriers redistribute in a non-trivial way, some orbitals effectively gaining holes while other
gain electrons. Within the CuO₂ plane at

25

a1)           a2)              b1)           b2)

y            z

e-

OP


x
IP
y

h+            OP
y            z
Hg O
O                             Cu
OP
Cu

x
IP
y                          Ca
Ca
OP
Ba
Cl


x              x
nCCOC
x              x
nHBCCO

FIG. 15. Charge density difference ∆ρ(r) between two different total VCA doping values for the
tri-layer (n = 3) (a1-a2) nCCOC and (b1-b2) nHBCCO. Panels (a1),(b1) are top views of the CuO2 OP
and IP, while (a2),(b2) are side views of the whole structure.


intermediate doping ∆ρ³⁰−¹⁰, the extra holes populate the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals, as well as
the O-pₓ or-bitals (pointing towards the Cu atoms). The O-py and pz orbitals (pointing away from
Cu) gain electrons instead, so that the O atoms remain close to the O²− oxidation state.
50−30
δtₒt = 30%.

Charge redistribution in the tri-layer compounds
We now turn to the charge redistribution in the tri-layer compounds. Since the CuO₂ planes remain
in the intermediate regime even at δtₒt = 50%, both ∆ρ³⁰−¹⁰

At larger values of doping ∆ρ
the Cu-dₓ2−y2 or-
and ∆ρ⁵⁰−³⁰ are similar, and we only show the former in

bital seems to stop accepting additional holes. They in-
stead start to populate the Cu-dₓy orbital. However, the behavior of the Cu-dz2 and the O-p
orbitals remains simi-lar to the intermediate doping regime, where pₓ gains ex-tra holes while py,
pz gain electrons. This observation is consistent with the transformations of the spectral
func-tion shown in Fig. 11. At δtₒt = 50% the Fermi level has been shifted below the Van Hove
singularity, and t₂g va-lence states, such as Cu-dₓy, start to get populated with holes.
The charge redistribution in the n = 1 nHBCCO com-pound at low doping (∆ρ³⁰−¹⁰ is shown in Fig.
14(b1). The strongest electronic cloud is now in proximity to Hg atom (to which VCA is applied). In
similarity with nCCOC, the holes in the CuO₂ plane occupy the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ orbitals, but the
compensating electrons are here found only on the O-pz orbital, not py. This is linked with the
absence of interstitial Ca atoms (see below the discussion of the n = 3 compounds). Another
difference is that the Cu-dz2 absorbs electron rather than holes upon hole-doping. This may be
related to the larger crystal-field splitting between the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 or-bitals in nHBCCO
compounds, discussed in Sec. IV D. At large values of doping (∆ρ⁵⁰−³⁰) the CuO₂ plane be-comes
almost inert, and the vast majority of the holes screen electrons close to the Hg and apical O
atoms. This is consistent with the momentum-resolved spectral func-tions in Fig. 11, which remains
almost unchanged beyond
Fig. 15. Both the inner (IP1) and the two outer planes (OP) in nCCOC compound (Fig. 15(a1)) are
similar to the single-layer compound, namely holes go on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital and O-pₓ, while
electrons go on py and pz. There is a substantial difference in the intensity between the two
planes: the IP1 is less hole-doped than the OP, which is consistent with the spectral functions
discussed in Sec. IV B.
This is also evident in Fig. 15(a2), which shows the density difference along the xz plane. The
redistribution of holes in the outer plane O-pz orbital is very peculiar: the outer part, pointing
towards the charge-reservoir lay-ers is confined, while in inner part merges with an ex-tended
electronic cloud between the OP and Ca atoms. This behavior is reminiscent of orbitals at the
surface of a material, and thus connects with our analysis of the undoped compounds: the physics of
the n-CuO₂-plane stack is similar to that of a thin film when n  2 (see Sec. III B 2).
In Fig. 15(b1,b2) we show the charge density difference
∆ρ³⁰−¹⁰ for the tri-layer nHBCCO compound. Overall, it is very similar to its nCCOC counterpart:
the inner plane is again less hole-doped than the outer planes, and the same orbitals gain holes of
electrons. We notice that in the OP the O-p orbitals pointing away from Cu tend to gain electrons
(see Fig. 15(b1)), which was not the case in the n = 1 nHBCCO compound (see Fig. 14(b1)). Such
difference may be related to the presence of addi-

26

the inner planes. In particular, the disappearance of su-perconductivity in IP0 and IP1 for n  4 is
striking. We checked that this disappearance resists to the inclusion of the proximity effect, see
App. D. The n = 3 compounds are the only one hosting significant superconductivity in the inner
planes (IP1), and nHBCCO has much stronger superconductivity in IP1 as compared to nCCOC. Our
results are similar to the experimental work of Ref. 62, in which it was found that the estimated
Tc in the in-ner planes is almost always smaller than in the outer planes. In the next paragraph we
explain these observa-tions, which were so far not understood theoretically.








FIG. 16. Optimal superconducting order parameter mSC for the n = 1 − 5 nCCOC (left ) and nHBCCO
(right ), in each type of CuO2 planes.
Superconducting order parameter vs. doping
We show mSC with respect to the estimated doping for each plane (δOP,IP¹,IP⁰) in Fig. 17(a). The
filled and the
2
open symbols stand for nCCOC and nHBCCO, respec-
tively.  As observed in Sec. IV D,IV C, the single-layer nCCOC can be efficiently doped so that we
can find the under-doped (< 16%), optimally doped (  20%), and also the over-doped regime, with the
fast drop of mSC

around δOP
2
≃ 33.6%. In contrast, the effective dop-

tional Ca atoms separating the CuO₂ planes for the n  2
nHBCCO structures.

D. Superconductivity

Having analyzed the normal state properties of the hole-doped compounds in Sec. IV B,IV C, we now
turn to superconductivity. As detailed in Sec. II B we com-pute the zero-temperature
superconducting d-wave order
parameter mSC = DˆSC for each plane separately. We
thus neglect the proximity effect in the superconducting state between adjacent CuO₂ planes for n
2, as justi-fied in App. D.
Optimal superconducting order parameter
In Fig. 16, we show the optimal superconducting or-der parameter mSC in nCCOC and nHBCCO, with
re-spect to the number of consecutive CuO₂ planes and their position in the structure. The optimal
mSC is ob-tained by taking the largest value among all dopings δtₒt = 10  50%. We observe that the
order parame-ter is overall larger in the nHBCCO compounds, consis-tently with expectations from
our analysis of the normal state properties in Sec. III, as well as from experimen-tally known
critical temperatures. In the outer planes of nHBCCO, mSC sharply increases from n = 1 to n = 2 and
then saturates, consistent with the n-dependence of the CTG and J (see Fig. 10). This is contrasted
with the behavior in the outer planes of nCCOC, in which the order parameter is only slowly and
monotonically in-creasing with n with no sharp jump (compare with Fig. 4 for the evolution of the
CTG and J).
The most important result in Fig. 16 is the non-trivial
dependence of the superconducting order parameter in
ing in the single-layer nHBCCO saturates, so that the
strongly over-doped regime is unreachable within this theoretical setup (and definitely hard in
experiment). The largest estimated doping is 22%, which is only slightly beyond optimal doping with
strong superconduc-tivity. Note that we performed additional calculations for the single-layer
compounds at δtₒt = 2.5, 5, and 7.5% to resolve the entire superconducting dome.
We observe that mSC is always vanishing when the estimated doping is below  4%, in remarkable
agree-ment with the opening of the superconducting gap at 4.3% doping observed with ARPES in the n
= 6 mul-tilayer cuprate [66] and reproduced in Fig. 17(b). It is also consistent with the
experimental phase diagram of clean hole-doped cuprates [169, 170]. This observation is very
interesting because the same CDMFT approach in the single- and three-band model simulations shows
persistent superconducting dome all the way to the in-finitesimally low doping [107, 164, 171,
172]. Hence the finite doping threshold in superconductivity must be re-lated to chemistry of
cuprates, and is possibly material dependent[173]. Furthermore, the results for n = 5 ex-plain why
the superconducting order parameter is van-ishing in the inner planes of the n  4 compounds: the
effective doping never reaches the minimum threshold for superconductivity to intrinsically emerge.
Hence, the n = 3 compounds appear, at the level of our calcula-tions, as the best compromise
between (i) hosting pro-tected inner planes, and (ii) reaching sufficient doping for
superconductivity to emerge in every plane.
We note that the inner plane (IP1) of the tri-layer
nHBCCO compound has the largest order parameter, and is still slightly under-doped at δtₒt = 50%.
Thus, additional hole doping by other means may even slightly increase the superconductivity in the
inner plane, while slightly reducing it in the outer plane. It would how-

27

















FIG. 17. (a) Superconducting order parameter mSC vs. estimated doping on the corresponding CuO2
plane for n = 1, 3, 5 nCCOC and nHBCCO. (b) ARPES symmetrized energy distribution curve showing the
opening of the superconducting gap in the IP1 plane, adapted with permission from Ref. 66. The hole
doping p corresponds to our convention δCuO2 .


ever be hard to reach doping levels in the five-layer com-pounds at which superconductivity would
be stabilized in all layers.
Link with the normal state properties
Overall, our results support the interpretation that the CTG and J control the superconducting
order pa-rameter [8, 174], but also show that the latter depends on other material-specific and
doping-dependent param-eters. In the following, we draw further connection be-tween mSC and the
normal state properties. We aim to answer two questions:  (i) what drives the under- and over-doped
transitions?; (ii) why is the order parame-ter in the nHBCCO compounds always larger than in nCCOC
(for a given doping value)?
We present in Fig. 18 the normal-state DOS at differ-ent estimated dopings, for n = 1 and n = 5,
projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and the O-pₓ orbitals. We first in-spect the panel (a1): it can be
seen that as long as the order parameter mSC is non-zero (three bottom curves),
there exist a double-peak structure in a  200 meV range around the Fermi level. Hereafter, we refer
to this feature as a pseudogap. The top curve in Fig. 18(a1) shows that
feature seems essential for superconductivity to emerge, which is consistent with conclusions drawn
from previous model studies [164].
A noteworthy finding in our calculations is that en-hanced particle-hole symmetry in the
normal-state den-sities of states appears to be associated with optimal doping for
superconductivity.  In non-interacting mod-els, the thermopower vanishes when the density of states
is particle-hole symmetric.  This correlation between particle-hole symmetry and optimal doping
suggests a straightforward theoretical explanation for the observed coincidence of vanishing
thermopower and optimal dop-ing in cuprates (See Fig.  2 of [175]).  Previous stud-ies using CDMFT
[176, 177] and DCA [178] found a dynamically generated particle-hole symmetry similar to the one
found here near optimal doping.  More-over, Ref. [176] finds that, when vertex corrections are
neglected, the thermopower vanishes precisely at the particle-hole-symmetric optimal doping.
As discussed above, our calculations reproduce the doping threshold of around 4% in the under-doped
region of the phase diagram even though the model calculations using CDMFT on a small 2 × 2 cluster
find superconduc-

the over-doped transition in nCCOC, at δOP
2
= 33.6%,
tivity at arbitrary small doping [107, 164, 171, 172, 179].

is directly linked with the loss of the pseudogap-like fea-
ture. This is a consequence of the transfer of the Van Hove singularity to the unoccupied part of
the spectrum. In Fig. 18(a2) are shown the normal-state DOS for n = 1 nHBCCO. As discussed above,
the effective doping δOP
2
saturates: the pseudogap does not close, and thus mSC
does not vanish.
This relation between the normal-state pseudogap-like feature and the superconducting order
parameter can also be observed in the underdoped side of the dome. As shown in Fig. 18(b1,b2), the
order parameter in both n = 5 nCCOC and nHBCCO is zero for small dopings at which the normal-state
DOS does not contain spec-tral weight around 100  200 meV above the Fermi level. Hence the
particle-hole symmetry of the pseudogap-like
It is important to stress that in these calculations the nor-
mal state spectral function contains the pseudogap-like feature in its spectrum spectrum even at
this infinitesimal dopings [164, 179]. In contrast, using larger clusters and similar quantum
embedding methods, it was found that there is a doping threshold at small doping [60].
Interest-ingly, larger clusters suppress the pseudogap-like feature at these low doping levels
[163]. Our results are thus in agreement with these findings, although we use a small
2  2 impurity cluster, but more realistic electronic struc-ture. Taking into account all other
degrees of freedom in the structure, even at the DFT level, therefore allows to recover the right
doping-dependence of mSC. It is as if the impurity problem is “blind” to very low doping, the
spectral function looks thus similar to the insulating case

28




















FIG. 18. DFT+CDMFT DOS projected on the OP planes of the n = 1, 5 (a1,b1) nCCOC and (a2,b2) nHBCCO
compounds at different estimated dopings. The latter, and the corresponding superconducting order
parameter mSC are explicitly written alongside each DOS. The arrows highlight the presence or
absence of the symmetric pseudogap-like features around the Fermi level.


and we observe only a chemical potential shift to the top of the ZRS band.


To answer the question on the difference in supercon-ductivity between the nCCOC and nHBCCO
compound, we show in Fig. 19 the normal-state DOS of the different CuO₂ planes in the two systems,
at different dopings. Their Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ DOS are very similar when projecting to the outer
plane (see Fig. 19(a1)). The Cu-dz2 DOS is however very different in the outer planes of the two
compounds (see Fig. 19(a2)). The crystal-field splitting is much larger in nHBCCO, which has been
shown to favor superconductivity [160, 161].


The normal state DOS of the inner plane is shown in Figs. 19(b1,b2).  We note that projection onto
the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ orbitals at small doping of 4.4% in nCCOC compound does not have the
pseudogap-like feature, and the superconductivity is vanishing. In con-trast, nHBCCO compound at
only slightly larger dop-ings of 5.7% has this feature, and has finite mSC. At larger dopings of
9.9% in nCCOC, the pseudogap-like fea-ture starts to emerge, but it not fully formed in contrast to
nHBCCO. Consequently, mSC becomes non-zero in nCCOC but is weaker than in nHBCCO. Moreover, the
crystal field splitting between the Cu-dz2 and dₓ2−y2 or-bitals is equally large in both compounds
in the inner planes, and thus does not contribute to differentiate the strength of mSC. Based on
this discussion, we conclude that the pseudogap-like particle-hole symmetric feature of the normal
state DOS is essential for the emergence superconductivity, and also explains why
superconduc-tivity is hindered in the IP1 of nCCOC.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this work, we developed a charge self-consistent density functional theory plus cluster
dynamical mean-field theory framework, aiming towards an ab ini-tio theory of high-temperature
superconductors. This approach unlocks the simultaneous prediction of the material-specific
superconducting, spectral and antifer-romagnetic properties in unconventional superconduc-tors. To
demonstrate these capabilities we investigated two multilayer cuprate families, Ca₍₁₊n₎CunO₂nCl₂,
and HgBa₂Ca₍n−₁₎CunO₍₂n₊₂₎, from the single- (n = 1) to the five-layer (n = 5) compounds, shedding
light on their still-mysterious and often universal characteristics.
Before delving deeper into our findings,  it is im-portant to note that the zero-temperature
supercon-ducting order parameter, msc, and the superconduct-ing critical temperature, Tc, are not
strictly propor-tional.  In the conventional BCS theory, the super-conducting gap is proportional
to Tc, but our case is more complex.  Here, BCS theory does not apply, and phase fluctuations
likely influence msc and Tc differ-ently. As a result, the peak of the Tc dome as a func-tion of
doping is determined by finite-temperature long-distance phase fluctuations [180, 181]. In the
underdoped regime, Kosterlitz-Thouless physics becomes increasingly more important [182], with the
superfluid stiffness de-creasing [183, 184].  Nevertheless, at the level of dy-namical mean-field
theory and one band model, stud-ies have shown that the maximum Tc—in the absence of
Kosterlitz-Thouless vortex-antivortex physics—is pro-portional to the maximum zero-temperature msc
[185]. Thus, we have made this assumption in our analysis, and subsequent paragraphs are based on
it.  Further work will be necessary to compute the actual Tc, including

29


a1)             a2)                b1)             b2)


















FIG. 19. DFT+CDMFT DOS projected on the (a1,a2) OP and the (b1,b2) IP1 planes of the n = 3 nCCOC
and nHBCCO com-pounds. The estimated doping and superconducting order parameter mSC for each plane
and structure are displayed, the values for nHBCCO are given between parenthesis.


Kosterlitz-Thouless phase fluctuations.
The most remarkable feature of the multilayer cuprates is the universal n-dependence of the
critical temperature: Tc is often maximum for n = 3 [62]. As was shown in Ref. 13 this translates
into a similar trend in the CTG, since the latter is expected to be inversely proportional to Tc
[8, 12]. In particular, the reduction of the CTG could be directly visualized through scanning
transmis-sion microscopy in undoped compounds from n = 1 to n = 3 [13].  We show that the
n-dependence of the CTG is indeed universal and that our DFT+CDMFT approach is able to reproduce it
accurately. Most impor-tantly, we trace its origin to the emergence of low-energy conduction states
for n  2, reminiscent of quantum well states, which provide an additional hybridization channel for
the correlated orbitals, and pin the upper Hubbard band closer to the Fermi level. These well
states explain the reduction of the CTG from the single- to the bi-layer compounds. Furthermore,
their confinement along the z direction within the n-CuO₂-plane stack, as if they were trapped in a
thin film, induces a reduction of the CTG in the inner planes in comparison to the outer ones, as
the former can hybridize on both sides (above and below) while the latter can hybridize on one side
only (above or below). Consequently the CTG is further reduced in the inner planes for n  3. This
translates into an increase of the superexchange J and relates to the experimental evidence of
stronger antiferromagnetism within the in-ner planes [62, 65, 66]. It is remarkable that this
physics is intrinsic to the multilayer compounds: it exists prior to the inhomogeneous doping and
disorder which are ex-pected to increase the differentiation between the outer and inner planes.
While the n-dependence of the CTG (and J) is uni-
versal to all multilayer families of cuprates, the abso-lute value of the gap is a
material-specific characteristic well captured by our method. Namely, the presence of self-doping
bands in the nHBCCO compounds induces a global, i.e., independent of n, lowering of the CTG in
comparison to nCCOC. This is consistent with the lower Tc of nCCOC compounds as compared to nHBCCO,
and agrees with the STM measurements of Ref. 13 showing that Bi-based compounds have an overall
smaller (larger) CTG (TC) than nCCOC. We emphasize that these phe-nomena involve a subtle interplay
between the correlated and non-correlated degrees of freedom that is beyond the reach of usual
model Hamiltonians. Our study thus underlines the need for ab initio methods that include this
interplay naturally, to enable material-specific pre-dictions for high-temperature superconductors.
We studied the hole-doped compounds using the vir-tual crystal approximation. There are numerous
experi-mental evidence of the inhomogeneous doping between the outer and inner planes [62, 65–67],
that our cal-culations capture accurately. This inhomogeneity leads to the emergence of a composite
Fermi surface made of Fermi arcs and pockets, in agreement with photoemission spectroscopy data
[65, 66]. Having access to the entire doping evolution, from the undoped to the over-doped regimes,
we can support the interpretation of Refs. 65 and 66 that pockets are a consequence of
antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations and originate from the inner planes. This is deeply linked with
the physics of the undoped compounds, in which spin-polaron quasiparticles emerge close to the
Fermi level due to the strong spin fluctua-tions. These quasiparticles display a backfolded
disper-sion across the nodal point along the Γ-M direction. In the low-doping region to which the
inner planes are con-

30


Family   n = 1   n = 2 n = 3 n = 4 n = 5
nHBCCO   98 K   127 K 137 K 127 K 111 K
nCCOC 28 K (43 K) 49 K   -    -    -
TABLE I. Critical temperature Tc vs n for three families of multilayer cuprates, taken from Refs.
[62,79,186]. The two values for single-layer nCCOC corresponds to, respectively, Na-doped and
vacancy-doped (between parenthesis) samples. The two-layer nCCOC Tc is measured on Na-doped
samples.


fined, the spectral function mainly experiences a chemical potential shift that promotes the
unperturbed backfolded feature at the Fermi level, thus leading to the emergence of pockets.
The redistribution of charges within the material is a complex process. However, our charge
self-consistent approach offers direct insight into this redistribution, in-corporating the
corrections to charge density introduced by electronic correlations. We identify markedly
differ-ent behaviors at intermediate doping in contrast to large doping. At intermediate doping,
the holes primarily oc-cupy the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ (pointing towards Cu) or-bitals, as well as the
VCA-doped atom (Ca, Hg). These extra holes are always accompanied by additional elec-trons located
on nearby orbitals, which vary depending on the surrounding crystal environment. The doping
in-homogeneity between the inner and outer planes can be directly witnessed. In the strongly
overdoped regime, which is reached for the single-layer compounds, the Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital both in
nCCOC and nHBCCO seems not to accept additional holes, and even slightly gains elec-trons. In fact,
the effective hole-doping in nHBCCO sat-urates due to the promotion of other degrees of freedom to
the Fermi level, which points out the importance of possible doping limitations of certain
cuprates.
Another key element of this work is the ab initio esti-mation of the superconducting order
parameter mSC as a function of hole-doping. Each CuO₂ plane was treated separately after converging
the DFT+CDMFT calcula-tion in the normal state. As discussed in App. D, the proximity effect is
anyway weak and does not limit our interpretation. One of the key result is the absence of
superconductivity in the inner planes of the n  4 com-pounds. This is unambiguously explained by
the fact that, until a total doping of δtₒt = 50%, these planes do not reach sufficient hole-doping
to host superconduc-tivity.  Indeed, in remarkable agreement with experi-ments [66], our
calculations show that below δCuO2   4%
hole-doping in the CuO₂ plane, superconductivity does
not emerge. Therefore, the tri-layer compounds (n = 3) appear as the best compromise between (i)
hosting pro-tected inner planes, and (ii) reaching sufficient doping in every plane.  Moreover, mSC
is globally larger in nHBCCO compounds in comparison to nCCOC, as ex-pected from the value of Tc, J
and CTG discussed above. As mentioned in the beginning of the conclusion, we infer the
superconducting properties via the zero-temperature order parameter mSC, which is not strictly
proportional to Tc but can in principle be measured ex-perimentally [12].  We provide in Table I
the experi-mentally known Tc for the nCCOC and nHBCCO com-pounds. The variations in critical
temperature are over-all more pronounced than the variations of the estimated mSC. Yet, the trends
we obtain are robust since all the calculations were performed under the exact same
ap-proximations.  Moreover, we emphasize that our pre-dictions allow to understand how three
properties of mutlilayer cuprates, apparently unrelated, can be com-bined together to understand
the universal trend in Tc vs. n in multilayer cuprates. First, there exists a doping threshold for
the CuO₂ planes below which superconduc-tivity cannot emerge, as shown experimentally [66] and in
this work. Second, hole-doping in multilayer cuprates is strongly inhomogeneous, and doping the
inner planes is particularly challenging. Third, if they were not so dif-ficult to dope, inner
planes would be intrinsically more favorable for superconductivity since they display smaller CTG,
larger J, and in real materials they would be pro-tected from distortions etc.
Our results also enable linking the normal state prop-erties with the evolution of the
zero-temperature super-conducting order parameter. For superconductivity to emerge, the
normal-state DOS in a range of  200 meV around the Fermi level needs to display a pseudogap-like
feature having a particle-hole symmetric character. Both the under-doped and over-doped
superconducting phase transitions are linked with the disappearance of this fea-ture. This also
explains the difference between the IP1 of the nCCOC and nHBCCO tri-layer compounds. The former
host a significantly weaker intrinsic order param-eter since the normal-state pseudogap-like
feature does not become markedly particle-hole symmetric: we ob-serve only a shoulder above the
Fermi level, instead of a well-defined second peak. In fact, the difference may be traced back to
the self-doping from the Hg-O bands which, in the tri-layer nHBCCO promotes hole-doping in the IP1
rather than the OP. This observation might provide a way to favorably tune the hole distribution in
multilayer cuprates.
We believe that our work not only contributes to a bet-ter understanding of high-temperature
superconductors, but that it also paves the way towards new research per-spectives. On the one
hand, the advancement of ab initio predictive approaches may enable a more complete un-derstanding
of doping in high-temperature superconduc-tors, which is necessary to address the material-specific
tendencies. For instance, we expect that chemical substi-tution in nCCOC and oxygen insertion in
nHBCCO may lead to significantly different carrier redistributions and structural deformations,
which will necessarily affect the superconducting properties. This may enable to deepen the
variations in predicted mSC. Similarly, our method will enable studies of the effect of
non-magnetic impuri-ties within the CuO₂ layers, which affect differently the pseudogap and
superconductivity [170].
At the same time, our work motivates further method-

31


ological improvements to quantum impurity solvers. Be-ing able to afford more bath orbitals within
the ED solver would be a great advantage, thus recent developments using matrix-product states to
perform the Lanczos al-gorithm are promising [187]. New algorithmic advances in the field of
Quantum Monte Carlo solvers [188–190] may also be beneficial to directly evaluate Tc is these
compounds.
Moreover, the estimation of the superexchange param-eter J could be improved by solving the
Bethe-Salpeter equation. This would open the possibility to study the full spin excitation spectrum
ab initio. At this stage, the link between J and superconducting order parameter is our weakest
conclusion since the observed relative change in Tc as a function of the number of layers is much
larger than the calculated relative change in J.
Finally, while the superconducting order parameter in-forms about the tendency of the system to
create elec-tron pairs, it is crucial to also estimate the tendency of these pairs to form a
coherent state by computing the superfluid stiffness.  We believe that the latter may be estimated
ab initio using our approach, thanks to devel-opments enabling computation of two-particle
quantities with Lanczos-based exact diagonalization solvers [191], and the computation of the
superfluid stiffness within DMFT [192].
Our work is the first step of a fascinating long-term re-search program. Indeed, further
understanding of the problem could be obtained through many additional studies, such as the ab
initio competition of d-wave super-conductivity and antiferromagnetism, the pressure de-pendence of
the superconducting order parameter, better estimates for the transition temperature, large
through-put exploratory calculations for new superconducting materials etc.
In conclusion, our contribution paves the way towards predictive approaches for high-temperature
superconduc-tors which, as exemplified in this work, host a huge po-tential for theoretical
material design.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge Nicolas Gauthier and Gabriel Kotliar for fruitful discussions. B.B.-L. was supported
by a pres-tige postdoctoral fellowship from Institut quantique, and acknowledge support from the US
National Science Foun-dation (NSF) Grant Number 2201516 under the Accelnet program of Office of
International Science and Engineer-ing (OISE). B.B.-L., B. L., A.-M.S.T. and D.S. acknowl-
edge financial support by the Canada First Research Ex-cellence Fund.  Numerical calculations were
performed on computers provided by Rutgers University, by Calcul Qu´ebec and by the Digital
Research Alliance of Canada. Work by K.H. was supported by NSF DMR-2233892 and by a grant from the
Simons Foundation (SFI-MPS-NFS-00006741-06, K.H.)
Author contributions: B. B.-L. integrated the PyQCM
library into the eDMFT software conceived, respectively, by D. S. and K. H.. B. B.-L. carried the
calculations, as well as the analysis with help from the other authors.
B. L. performed the proximity effect calculations. K.H., A.-M.S.T. and D.S. initiated the project
and supervised it. All authors participated in the writing of the present manuscript.

32





Original I4/mmm   Approx. P4/mmm
14
n = 2
12

10

8

6

4

2

0
14
n = 4
12

10

8

6

4

2

0





n = 3














n = 5
ing model is adapted accoding to the “metallicity” of the system (see Sec. II B), the
double-counting correction may be different in the parent and hole-doped compound. This prevents a
straightforward comparison of the orbital occupations. Another possible way to estimate the dop-ing
is to quantify the density of state (DOS) in the low-energy region above the Fermi level. In the
following, we detail our estimation procedure.
The parent cuprate compounds are charge-transfer in-sulators (say, in absence of self-doping). The
charge-transfer gap originates from the opening of the Mott gap of the Cu-d band. Hence, it is
instructive to discuss briefly the behavior of Mott and charge-transfer insula-tors upon
hole-doping [162], as sketched in Fig. 21(a). In the pictorial Mott system (made of only the Cu-d),
the integrated spectral weight just above the Fermi level is expected to be equal to twice the
amount of hole-doping δ, since the spectral weight is transferred from both Hub-bard bands. In
contrast, in a charge-transfer system, the

−4 −3 −2 −1  0  1  2  3  4−4 −3 −2 −1  0  1  2  3  4
Fermi level crosses the O-p bands, and therefore hole-

ω (eV)
ω (eV)
doping is similar to the semi-conductors for which the integrated spectral weight just above the
Fermi level is

FIG. 20. DFT DOS obtained using the original crystal struc-ture (I4/mmm) and the approximated one
(P 4/mmm), for all n ≥ 2 nCCOC compounds.


Appendix A: Benchmark of the structure approximation for nCCOC

To perform calculations for the nCCOC compounds from n = 1 to n = 5 with 2  2 supercells, we had to
introduce a structural approximation for n  2 (see Sec. II A). The I4/mmm space group is
transformed to P 4/mmm before generating the supercell, which allows to effectively divide the
number of atoms considered by two.
We show in Fig. 20 the DFT-only DOS for the n  2 nCCOC compounds with and without structural
approx-imation. For all compounds, the DOS are indistinguish-able in a window of  3 eV around the
Fermi level. Some small discrepancy start to be noticed beyond  3 eV. The low-energy region of the
spectrum is dominated by degrees of freedom related to the CuO₂ planes, which
equal to the amount of hole-doping δ.
In reality, both these pictures are wrong since a Zhang-Rice singlet (ZRS) band forms at
low-energy. The ZRS has a mixed Cu-d and O-p character. Thus, for an ef-fective doping δCuO2 in the
CuO₂ planes the integrated spectral weight  CuO2 just above the Fermi level, pro-jected onto the
Cu-d and O-p orbitals, will most prob-ably correspond to ICuO2 = xδCuO2 , with x ∈ [1, 2]. It is
therefore not possible to directly estimate δCuO2 from the spectral weight just above the Fermi
level.
We however exploit the fact that most of the holes δtₒt are captured by the Cu-d and O-p orbitals.
Hence, the changes in the total low-energy spectral weight above the Fermi level is driven by the
behavior of the Cu-d and O-p orbitals. In other words, if the projected low-energy spectral weight
onto the Cu-d and O-p orbitals amounts to  CuO2 = xδCuO2 , then the total one should be very
close to tₒt = xδtₒt. Since δtₒt is known (set by the
virtual crystal approximation), the effective doping on the CuO₂ planes can be estimated by taking
the ratio of the spectral weight integrands close to the Fermi level:
ICuO

are unaffected by structural modifications in the Cl-Cl planes.  It is this region mostly that will
be corrected
δCuO2 =
Itot
2 δtₒt.       (B1)

by the CDMFT self-energy. Our approximation is there-
fore justified since it leaves the DFT starting point, over which the DFT+CDMFT is carried out,
unchanged.


Appendix B: Estimation of the hole-content in the CuO2 planes

Similarly to experiment, estimating the amount of ef-fective hole-doping of each CuO₂ plane within
our re-alistic calculations is not straightforward. Because of the exact double-counting scheme, in
which the screen-
This is illustrated in Fig. 21(b), where Itₒt correspond to the shaded gray area, and CuO2 to the
dotted one.
As mentioned in the text, this approximation works
well when the doped holes primarily occupy the CuO₂ planes. This is the case of all nCCOC compounds
stud-ied, but it poses a limitation for the nHBCCO com-pounds at large doping. This can be
understood in Fig. 21(c): the Hg and apical O spectral weight starts to cross the Fermi level at
large doping (here illustrated at δtₒt = 50%). This weakens our assumption that the total and
projected areas share the same x, and leads to poorer estimations of δCuO2 . We however emphasize

33


a)  DOS - Mott-Hubbard     b)                 c)







DOS - Charge transfer







FIG. 21. (a) Simplified sketch of the DOS of a hole-doped Mott insulator (top panel ) and a
hole-doped charge-transfer insulator (bottom panel ). (b)-(c) Representative example of a
hole-doped multilayer cuprate DOS, obtained from the DFT+CDMFT calculation at δtₒt = 30, 50%. The
DOS projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ orbitals of the outer plane, and onto the apical O and Hg
atoms are also displayed. The shaded grey area represents the integrated area for the full DOS, and
the dotted region the area for the CuO2 plane. The ratio of the two provides an estimate of the
proportion of holes δCuO2 plane (see text).


that the limitation only concerns the data analysis at large doping, and not our ab initio method.
Hence, it is not detrimental to any conclusion of the present work.


Appendix C: Benchmark of the exact diagonalisation solver

We carried out numerous benchmarks of PyQCM’s exact diagonalization (ED) solver [60, 61] in
compar-ison to the Continuous-time Quantum Monte Carlo (CTQMC) solver implemented within the eDMFT
frame-work [58, 110]. We detail in this section one representa-tive example: a DFT + single-site
DMFT calculation for the single-layer nCCOC compound, in which we treat the Cu-eg orbitals within a
two-orbital impurity. We set U = 12 eV and JHund = 1 eV.
We  show  in  Fig.  22(a)  the  evolution  of  the DFT+DMFT total energy all along the
self-consistent calculation. Both solvers converge to the same final total energy within a
precision of 2 10−⁴. In Fig. 22(b), we also compare the convergence of the occupation of the
cor-related Cu-eg orbitals estimated from the lattice (nlₐtt) and from the impurity (nimp).
Similarly, the ED results are in excellent agreement with the ones obtained using CTQMC: the
occupations differ by less than 10−³. Most importantly, the convergence of nlₐtt and nimp when
us-ing the ED solver shows that the discretization of the bath does not hinder the accuracy.
The excellent agreement is also witnessed in the re-sulting Green’s function and self-energy
projected onto the local subspace, which are shown in Fig. 23(a,b). The ED and CTQMC results match
almost perfectly down to the lowest Matsubara frequency, which allows an ex-cellent agreement of
all static observables as discussed above. Hence, as demonstrated in our work and this
rep-resentative example, exact diagonalization solvers can be
a)









b)









FIG. 22. Convergence of (a) the DFT+DMFT total energy difference (taking the converged ED energy as
reference), and
(b) the lattice (nimp) and impurity occupations (nlₐtt) as ob-tained with the CTQMC and ED solvers.

34

a)                     sions regarding the n  4 multilayer compounds: until δtₒt = 50% doping, even
when taking into account the proximity effect, the inner panes remain in the normal phase due to
the lack of holes.
To include the proximity effect, we generalized the scheme described in Sec. II D to treat
super-clusters made of the 2  2 plaquettes of every consecutive CuO₂ plane. Following the
super-cluster philosophy [193, 194], we ne-glect the inter-cluster self-energy but we include
explic-itly the coupling between the CuO₂ planes on the lattice, i.e., at the mean-field level.
Formally, the self-energy thus reads


b)                              
¹ (ω)   0   . . .
0   Σ² (ω)  0     

  .    0

0 Σⁿ
0
(ω)
αβ

where each block Σⁱ (ω) corresponds to the self-energy
of the iᵗʰ (i  1, n ) CuO₂ plane (Eq. (35), Sec. II D). On the lattice, the coupling between the
planes is in-cluded within the effective dispersion:
Γ¹¹ (k, ω) Γ¹² (k, ω) . . .     
Γ²¹ (k, ω) Γ²² (k, ω)        

αβ     αβ
Γ(k, ω) =   .
  .
. . .


Γⁿⁿ(k, ω)


(D2)

FIG. 23. Matsubara (a) Green’s function and (b) self-energy projected onto the local subspace, as
obtained with the CTQMC and ED solvers.


successfully and efficiently used within realistic ab initio calculations.

Appendix D: Including the proximity effect

All the estimations of the superconducting order pa-rameter mSC presented in the main text were
obtained by neglecting the proximity effect between the neighbouring CuO₂ planes. Given the short
distance that separates the outer from the inner planes, one may question the valid-ity of this
approximation. In particular, we may imagine a scenario in which superconductivity is triggered in
orig-inally non-superconducting inner planes (say, because of insufficient doping), due to the
proximity with supercon-ducting outer planes.
In the following, we first present a way to include the proximity effect in our calculations, and
then discuss its impact on the superconducting order parameter.  We show that it is a weak effect
in multilayer compounds, at least at ambient pressure, and especially that it is not able to
trigger superconductivity in the inner planes even in the presence of superconducting outer planes.
Most importantly, these results strongly reinforce our conclu-
We emphasize that, as described in Sec. II D, the com-putation of Γ(k, ω) does not involve any free
parameter. We show in Fig. 24 a representative example of the im-pact of the proximity effect on
the superconducting order parameter. The latter is only weakly affected in the tri-layer nCCOC and
nHBCCO compounds, see panels (a) and (b). Moreover, superconductivity is not triggered in the inner
planes of the n  4 compounds, as exemplified in the panel (c) for the nCCOC family (nHBCCO be-haves
similarly). Hence our conclusions regarding the predominant role of the effective hole-doping of
the in-ner planes in multilayer cuprates are unambiguously con-
firmed.
Finally, we note one sizable change due to the proxim-ity effect : mSC in the IP1 of the tri-layer
nCCOC com-pounds is enhanced and even exceeds that of the OP. This leads to a smaller difference
between the IP1 of the nCCOC and nHBCCO compounds.

Appendix E: On the choice of the on-site U

Choosing the value of the Hubbard on-site U is a critical issue when studying effective low energy
mod-els of strongly-correlated systems. Variations of a few hundreds of meV may drastically change
the resulting physics. However, this sensitivity to U is substantially reduced within realistic
electronic structure methods like ours. In our ab initio embedding approach, the relevant

35



IP1 (separated)   OP (separated)   IP1   OP
a)                     b)                       c)
0.08

0.08


0.06
0.08


0.06



0.06



0.04


0.04

0.04



0.02


0.00


n=3 nHBCCO
2    4    6    8    10

0.02


0.00


n=3 nCCOC
2   4   6   8   10   12   14
0.02


0.00


n=4 nCCOC
2   4   6   8   10   12   14

FIG. 24.  Superconducting order parameter mSC vs.  estimated doping δCuO2 for the (a) tri-layer
nHBCCO, (b) tri-layer nCCOC and (c) four-layer nCCOC compounds. The dashed lines do not include the
proximity effect while the solid lines do. The observed proximity effect is small.


U scale is much larger.  For example, the unscreened Coulomb U is approximately 31 eV for the
chosen or-bital, and the screened U falls between 10 and 14,eV (as estimated for single-layer CCOC
and HBCCO). The dominant screening contributions come from other or-bitals on Cu site, i.e. the 1s,
2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, ... and t₂g orbitals of Cu, which are not explicitly included in our impurity
problem.  Consequently, the U values we use are significantly larger than those typically employed
in single-band effective models. Most importantly, within our framework, large variations in U have
only a minor effect on the physical picture, ensuring that the results remain robust against
uncertainties in U .
We have performed multiple tests to ensure that the conclusions of our work are robust against the
choice of U , and we detail one representative example in this sec-tion. We performed DFT+CDMFT
calculations on the tri-layer nCCOC compound, in the same conditions as for all other computations
presented in the main manuscript, simply varying U from 10 eV to 14 eV. The resulting DOS are shown
in Fig. 25. Despite variations of the ab-solute value of the CTG, at all U considered we observe
the same differentiation between outer and inner planes. The latter always display a smaller charge
gap, which is consistent with our main conclusions. Moreover, the overall shape of the DOS remains
relatively stable at all U values, which is confirmed by inspecting the momentum-resolved spectral
functions displayed in Fig. 26. All the salient spectral features discussed in the main manuscript
can be unambiguously seen at all values of U .
We emphasize that variations of U of the order of 4 eV in single-band effective models,
parameterized for usual cuprates, would lead to a dramatic change of the physics, most likely a
metal-insulator transition. Therefore, if U remains an adjustable parameter in our current
ap-proach, the robustness shown in this representative ex-ample strongly supports the ab initio
character of our method.
For a fully quantitative analysis, predictions of material-specific U is necessary. One can
estimate U self-consistently via the constrained eDMFT method [94]. In single-site eDMFT it gives
Coulomb U and JHund around
10 eV and 1 eV, respectively. For the present study, however, we found that many experimental
observations can be reproduced and interpreted with a fixed U value. Building on the arguments
developed here, we predict thatU should decrease from n = 1 to n = 2 in the outer planes, and then
saturate for n  3 in the outer planes. In the inner planes, U would likely be smaller due to
additional screening. We anticipate that estimat-ing material-specific U values would reinforce the
trends observed in this work, but we defer such investigations to future studies.


Appendix F: n-dependence of the orbital occupations in the undoped compounds

1. nCCOC

Another quantity of interest in cuprate superconduc-tors is the oxygen hole content [1–9].  Even in
the un-doped compounds the distribution of charges on the Cu-dₓ2−y2 /dz2  and O-pₓ/py/pz orbitals
is already instruc-tive.  In Fig. 27, we show the evolution of the charges on each of these
orbitals, with respect to the number of CuO₂ planes and their position in the structure. A
strik-ing feature reminiscent of the CTG evolution is that the occupation of the orbitals varies
significantly.  Specifi-cally, with increasing n the Cu-d orbitals drift away from their nominal
occupancy towards less correlated mixed valency. The nominal occupancy of the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 is
1 and 2, respectively. This means that electrons in the bi-layer compound experience weaker
correlations than in the single-layer one, in agreement with previ-ously found smaller CTG.
Furthermore, the inner planes are also more mixed-valent, hence explaining the smaller CTG in these
planes.
We note that such strong correlation between CTG and occupancy is an effect that is beyond model
Hamiltonian simulations, and requires a first-principles method as de-veloped here.  Namely,
changes of Cu occupancy here lead to substantial changes of the Hartree and exchange-correlation
potential, which affects the double-counting

36



















FIG. 25. Comparison of the DFT+CDMFT DOS projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and O-pₓ orbitals, obtained
with three different U values for the tri-layer nCCOC compound.

OP vs IP1               OP vs IP1               OP vs IP1
















FIG. 26. Comparison of the momentum-resolved spectral function projected onto the Cu-dₓ2−y2
orbital, obtained with three different U values for the tri-layer nCCOC compound.


potential, and consequently the on-site energy levels of Cu-d orbitals. Even more importantly,
these occupancies tune the crystal field splitting between the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals, which
plays a crucial role in enhancing su-perconductivity as discussed in Sec. IV D.
The occupancy of the O-p orbitals also varies with the number of layers and their position in the
structure. In particular, when the occupancy of the Cu-dₓ2−y2 or-bital increases (and consequently
the CTG decreases), the holes get transferred to the oxygen pₓ orbital, which points towards the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 orbital (see Fig. 27(b2)). Similar correlation between CTG and pₓ orbital occu-pancy was
reported in Ref. [8] on simulating the three-band Hubbard model. This introduction of additional
a precursor of the behavior upon hole-doping, as detailed in Sec. IV C.


2. nHBCCO

We also analyze the evolution of the orbital occupan-cies in nHBCCO, which are displayed in Fig.
28. The Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals show very similar trends as in nCCOC although, similarly to the
CTG, the layer dependence is weaker. For instance the maximum dif-ference ∆nᵈ2  2 ∼ 0.02 for nHBCCO
(difference taken

holes on oxygen pₓ orbital is particularly important as it was shown that higher concentration of
holes on oxy-gen favors superconductivity. The occupancy of the py
between the OP at n = 0 and IP1 at n = 3), while it
is ∆nᵈ2  2  0.04 for nCCOC. The same conclusion ap-plies to the O-p occupancies, to the exception
of the n = 2 compound which shows a slightly peculiar behavior of nᵖ
orbitals (pointing away from Cu) increases when pₓ de-      p                         ᶻ

creases in our simulation. Hence py orbital partially com-pensates for pₓ change of occupancy. The
relation be-tween the relative occupancy of the pₓ and py orbitals is
and ny . This may be linked with the fact that for n = 1
the Hg compounds do not contain any Ca atom, which
are introduced at n = 2.






1.27

1.26

1.25

1.24
37

a1)             a2)
y
1.84


1.82


1.80


1   2   3   4   5
n
1   2   3   4   5           px
OP     IP1     IP0

1.274 b1)

1.273

1.272

1.271


1   2   3   4   5
n

1.19

1.18

1.17

1.16

1.15
b2)





1   2   3   4   5
n
1.330 b3)
1.325
1.320
1.315
1.310
1.305

1   2   3   4   5
n

FIG. 27. Partial charges of, respectively, (a1-2) the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals, and (b1-3) the
O-pz, pₓ and py orbitals of nCCOC (n=1–5). The O-pₓ (py) orbital points towards (away from) the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 , as illustrated in (c).




1.305

1.300

1.295
a1)

1.80

1.79

1.78

1.77
a2)        c)
py

1.290                 1.76



1   2   3   4   5
n
1.75
1   2   3   4   5           px
OP     IP1     IP0

1.263 b1)
1.260

1.258

1.255

1.253

1.250

1.248
1.138
1.135
1.133
1.130
1.128
1.125
1.123
b2)



1.320


1.315


1.310
bb33))

1   2   3   4   5
n
1   2   3   4   5
n
1   2   3   4   5
n

FIG. 28. Partial charges of, respectively, (a1-2) the Cu-dₓ2−y2 and dz2 orbitals, and (b1-3) the
O-pz, pₓ and py orbitals in nHBCCO (n=1–5). The O-pₓ (py) orbital points towards (away from) the
Cu-dₓ2−y2 , as illustrated in (c).

38




[1] O. K. Andersen, A. I. Liechtenstein, O. Jepsen, and
F. Paulsen, LDA energy bands, low-energy hamiltoni-ans, t′, t′′, t⊥(k) and J⊥, Journal of Physics
and Chem-istry of Solids Proceedings of the Conference on Spec-troscopies in Novel Superconductors,
56, 1573 (1995).
[2] J. M. Tranquada, S. M. Heald, and A. R. Mooden-baugh, X-ray-absorption near-edge-structure
study of La2−x(Ba,Sr)CuO4−y superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 36, 5263 (1987).
[3] A. Fujimori, E. Takayama-Muromachi, Y. Uchida, and
B. Okai, Spectroscopic evidence for strongly correlated electronic states in La-Sr-Cu and Y-Ba-Cu
oxides, Phys. Rev. B 35, 8814 (1987).
[4] G.-q. Zheng, Y. Kitaoka, K. Ishida, and K. Asayama, Local hole distribution in the CuO2 plane
of High-Tc Cu-Oxides studied by Cu and Oxygen NQR/NMR, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 64,
2524 (1995).
[5] J. Haase, O. P. Sushkov, P. Horsch, and G. V. M. Williams, Planar Cu and O hole densities in
high-Tc cuprates determined with NMR, Phys. Rev. B 69, 094504 (2004).
[6] M. Jurkutat, D. Rybicki, O. P. Sushkov, G. V. M. Williams, A. Erb, and J. Haase, Distribution
of elec-trons and holes in cuprate superconductors as deter-mined from ¹⁷O and ⁶³Cu nuclear
magnetic resonance, Phys. Rev. B 90, 140504 (2014).
[7] D. Rybicki, M. Jurkutat, S. Reichardt, C. Kapusta, and J. Haase, Perspective on the phase
diagram of cuprate high-temperature superconductors, Nat Com-mun 7, 11413 (2016).
[8] N. Kowalski, S. S. Dash, P. S´emon, D. S´en´echal, and A.-
M. Tremblay, Oxygen hole content, charge-transfer gap, covalency, and cuprate superconductivity,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2106476118 (2021).
[9] M. Jurkutat, C. Kattinger, S. Tsankov, R. Reznicek,
A. Erb, and J. Haase, How pressure enhances the criti-cal temperature of superconductivity in
YBa2Cu3O6+y , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, e2215458120 (2023).
[10] C. Weber, C. Yee, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Scaling of the transition temperature of
hole-doped cuprate super-conductors with the charge-transfer energy, EPL 100, 37001 (2012).
[11] L. Wang, G. He, Z. Yang, M. Garcia-Fernandez, A. Nag,
K. Zhou, M. Minola, M. L. Tacon, B. Keimer, Y. Peng, and Y. Li, Paramagnons and high-temperature
super-conductivity in a model family of cuprates, Nat Com-mun 13, 3163 (2022).
[12] S. M. O’Mahony, W. Ren, W. Chen, Y. X. Chong,
X. Liu, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, M. H. Hamidian, and
J. C. S. Davis, On the electron pairing mechanism of copper-oxide high temperature
superconductivity, Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, e2207449119 (2022).
[13] Z. Wang, C. Zou, C. Lin, X. Luo, H. Yan, C. Yin, Y. Xu,
X. Zhou, Y. Wang, and J. Zhu, Correlating the charge-transfer gap to the maximum transition
temperature in Bi₂Sr₂Can−₁CunO₂n₊₄₊δ, Science 381, 227 (2023).
[14] J. c. v. Vuˇciˇcevi´c and M. Ferrero, Simple predictors of Tc
in superconducting cuprates and the role of interactions
between effective wannier orbitals in the d−p three-band model, Phys. Rev. B 109, L081115 (2024).
[15] J. Hubbard and B. H. Flowers, Electron correlations in narrow energy bands, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sci-ences 276, 238 (1963).
[16] M. C. Gutzwiller, Effect of correlation on the ferromag-netism of transition metals, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 10, 159 (1963).
[17] J. Kanamori, Electron correlation and ferromagnetism of transition metals, Progress of
Theoretical Physics 30, 275 (1963).
[18] V. J. Emery, Theory of high-TC superconductivity in oxides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794 (1987).
[19] C. M. Varma, S. Schmitt-Rink, and E. Abrahams, Charge transfer excitations and
superconductivity in “ionic” metals, Solid State Communications 62, 681 (1987).
[20] M. Imada, A. Fujimori, and Y. Tokura, Metal-insulator transitions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1039
(1998).
[21] H. Park, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Cluster dynamical mean field theory of the Mott transition,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 186403 (2008).
[22] G. Sordi, K. Haule, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Mott physics and first-order transition between two
metals in the normal-state phase diagram of the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 84,
075161 (2011).
[23] G. Sordi, P. S´emon, K. Haule, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Pseudogap temperature as a Widom line in
doped Mott insulators, Sci Rep 2, 547 (2012).
[24] J. Vuˇciˇcevi´c, H. Terletska, D. Tanaskovi´c, and V. Do-brosavljevi´c, Finite-temperature
crossover and the quantum Widom line near the Mott transition, Phys. Rev. B 88, 075143 (2013).
[25] C. Walsh, P. S´emon, D. Poulin, G. Sordi, and A.-
M. S. Tremblay, Thermodynamic and information-theoretic description of the Mott transition in the
two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 99, 075122 (2019).
[26] M. Civelli, M. Capone, S. S. Kancharla, O. Parcollet, and G. Kotliar, Dynamical breakup of the
Fermi surface in a doped Mott insulator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 106402 (2005).
[27] B. Kyung, S. S. Kancharla, D. S´en´echal, A.-M. S. Trem-blay, M. Civelli, and G. Kotliar,
Pseudogap induced by short-range spin correlations in a doped Mott insulator, Phys. Rev. B 73,
165114 (2006).
[28] S. Sakai, Y. Motome, and M. Imada, Evolution of elec-tronic structure of doped Mott
insulators: Reconstruc-tion of poles and zeros of Green’s function, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 056404
(2009).
[29] A. Macridin, M. Jarrell, T. Maier, P. R. C. Kent, and
E. D’Azevedo, Pseudogap and antiferromagnetic cor-relations in the Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. Lett.
97, 036401 (2006).
[30] M. Ferrero, P. S. Cornaglia, L. De Leo, O. Parcollet,
G. Kotliar, and A. Georges, Pseudogap opening and for-mation of Fermi arcs as an orbital-selective
Mott tran-sition in momentum space, Phys. Rev. B 80, 064501 (2009).

39


[31] P. Werner, E. Gull, O. Parcollet, and A. J. Millis, Momentum-selective metal-insulator
transition in the two-dimensional Hubbard model: An 8-site dynamical cluster approximation study,
Phys. Rev. B 80, 045120 (2009).
[32] E. Gull, M. Ferrero, O. Parcollet, A. Georges, and A. J. Millis, Momentum-space anisotropy and
pseudogaps: A comparative cluster dynamical mean-field analysis of the doping-driven
metal-insulator transition in the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 82, 155101 (2010).
[33] J. Merino and O. Gunnarsson, Pseudogap and sin-glet formation in organic and cuprate
superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 89, 245130 (2014).
[34] F. Krien, P. Worm, P. Chalupa-Gantner, A. Toschi, and
K. Held, Explaining the pseudogap through damping and antidamping on the Fermi surface by imaginary
spin scattering, Communications Physics 5, 336 (2022).
[35] G. Martinez and P. Horsch, Spin polarons in the t − J model, Phys. Rev. B 44, 317 (1991).
[36] A. Macridin, M. Jarrell, T. Maier, and D. J. Scalapino, High-energy kink in the
single-particle spectra of the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 237001 (2007).
[37] E. Manousakis, String excitations of a hole in a quantum antiferromagnet and photoelectron
spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 75, 035106 (2007).
[38] Y. Wang, K. Wohlfeld, B. Moritz, C. J. Jia, M. van Veenendaal, K. Wu, C.-C. Chen, and T. P.
Devereaux, Origin of strong dispersion in Hubbard insulators, Phys. Rev. B 92, 075119 (2015).
[39] B. Bacq-Labreuil, C. Fawaz, Y. Okazaki, Y. Obata,
H. Cercellier,  P. Le F`evre,  F. m. c. Bertran,
D. Santos-Cottin, H. Yamamoto, I. Yamada, M. Azuma,
K. Horiba, H. Kumigashira, M. d’Astuto, S. Bier-mann, and B. Lenz, Universal waterfall feature in
cuprate superconductors: Evidence of a momentum-driven crossover, Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 016502
(2025).
[40] B.-X. Zheng, C.-M. Chung, P. Corboz, G. Ehlers, M.-P. Qin, R. M. Noack, H. Shi, S. R. White,
S. Zhang, and
G. K.-L. Chan, Stripe order in the underdoped region of the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Science
358, 1155 (2017).
[41] M. Hirayama, T. Miyake, and M. Imada, Derivation of static low-energy effective models by an
ab initio down-folding method without double counting of Coulomb correlations: Application to
SrVO3, FeSe, and FeTe, Phys. Rev. B 87, 195144 (2013).
[42] M. Hirayama, Y. Yamaji, T. Misawa, and M. Imada, Ab initio effective Hamiltonians for cuprate
supercon-ductors, Phys. Rev. B 98, 134501 (2018).
[43] J.-B. Mor´ee, M. Hirayama, M. T. Schmid, Y. Ya-maji, and M. Imada, Ab initio low-energy
effective hamiltonians for the high-temperature superconducting cuprates Bi2Sr2CuO6, Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8,
HgBa₂CuO4, and CaCuO2, Phys. Rev. B 106, 235150 (2022).
[44] M. T. Schmid, J.-B. Mor´ee, R. Kaneko, Y. Yamaji, and M. Imada, Superconductivity studied by
solving ab initio low-energy effective hamiltonians for carrier doped  CaCuO2, Bi2Sr2CuO6,
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, and HgBa₂CuO4, Phys. Rev. X 13, 041036 (2023).
[45] K. Held, L. Si, P. Worm, O. Janson, R. Arita,
Z. Zhong, J. M. Tomczak, and M. Kitatani, Phase di-agram of nickelate superconductors calculated by
dy-
namical vertex approximation, Frontiers in Physics 9, 10.3389/fphy.2021.810394 (2022).
[46] M. Kitatani, L. Si, P. Worm, J. M. Tomczak, R. Arita, and K. Held, Optimizing
superconductivity:  From cuprates via nickelates to palladates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 166002
(2023).
[47] S. Di Cataldo, P. Worm, J. M. Tomczak, L. Si, and K. Held, Unconventional superconductivity
with-out doping in infinite-layer nickelates under pressure, Nature Communications 15, 3952 (2024).
[48] W. Metzner and D. Vollhardt, Correlated lattice fermions in d = ∞ dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett.
62, 324 (1989).
[49] A. Georges and G. Kotliar, Hubbard model in infinite dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 45, 6479 (1992).
[50] M. Jarrell, Hubbard model in infinite dimensions:  A quantum monte carlo study, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 69, 168 (1992).
[51] A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. J. Rozen-berg, Dynamical mean-field theory of
strongly corre-lated fermion systems and the limit of infinite dimen-sions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 13
(1996).
[52] S. Biermann, F. Aryasetiawan, and A. Georges, First-principles approach to the electronic
structure of strongly correlated systems: Combining the gw approx-imation and dynamical mean-field
theory, Physical Re-view Letters 90, 086402 (2003).
[53] T. N. Lan, A. Shee, J. Li, E. Gull, and D. Zgid, Testing self-energy embedding theory in
combination with gw, Physical Review B 96, 155106 (2017).
[54] E. A. Stepanov, V. Harkov, and A. I. Lichtenstein, Con-sistent partial bosonization of the
extended Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 100, 205115 (2019).
[55] M. Vandelli, J. Kaufmann, M. El-Nabulsi, V. Harkov,
A. Lichtenstein, and E. Stepanov, Multi-band D-TRILEX approach to materials with strong electronic
correlations, SciPost Physics 13, 036 (2022).
[56] Z.-H. Cui, J. Yang, J. To¨lle, H.-Z. Ye, S. Yuan, H. Zhai,
G. Park, R. Kim, X. Zhang, L. Lin, et al., Ab ini-tio quantum many-body description of
superconduct-ing trends in the cuprates, Nature Communications 16, 1845 (2025).
[57] T. Ayral, T.-H. Lee, and G. Kotliar, Dynamical mean-field theory, density-matrix embedding
theory, and ro-tationally invariant slave bosons: A unified perspective, Phys. Rev. B 96, 235139
(2017).
[58] K. Haule, C.-H. Yee, and K. Kim, Dynamical mean-field theory within the full-potential
methods: Electronic structure of CeIrIn5, CeCoIn5, and CeRhIn5, Phys. Rev. B 81, 195107 (2010).
[59] K. Haule, Structural predictions for correlated electron materials using the functional
dynamical mean field the-ory approach, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 87, 041005 (2018).
[60] T. N. Dionne, A. Foley, M. Rousseau, and D. S´en´echal, Pyqcm: An open-source Python library
for quantum cluster methods, SciPost Phys. Codebases , 23 (2023).
[61] T. N. Dionne, A. Foley, M. Rousseau, and D. S´en´echal, Codebase release 2.2 for Pyqcm,
SciPost Phys. Code-bases , 23 (2023).
[62] H. Mukuda, S. Shimizu, A. Iyo, and Y. Kitaoka, High-TC superconductivity and
antiferromagnetism in mul-tilayered copper oxides - A new paradigm of super-conducting mechanism,
J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 81, 011008

40


(2012).
[63] P. Dai, B. Chakoumakos, G. Sun, K. Wong, Y. Xin, and
D. Lu, Synthesis and neutron powder diffraction study of the superconductor HgBa₂Ca₂Cu₃O₈₊δ by Tl
substi-tution, Physica C: Superconductivity 243, 201 (1995).
[64] B. Loret, N. Auvray, Y. Gallais, M. Cazayous, A. For-get, D. Colson, M.-H. Julien, I. Paul, M.
Civelli, and A. Sacuto, Intimate link between charge density wave, pseudogap and superconducting
energy scales in cuprates, Nat. Phys. 15, 771 (2019).
[65] S. Kunisada, S. Isono, Y. Kohama, S. Sakai, C. Bareille,
S. Sakuragi, R. Noguchi, K. Kurokawa, K. Kuroda,
Y. Ishida, S. Adachi, R. Sekine, T. K. Kim, C. Ca-cho, S. Shin, T. Tohyama, K. Tokiwa, and T.
Kondo, Observation of small Fermi pockets protected by clean CuO2 sheets of a high-TC
superconductor, Science 369, 833 (2020).
[66] K. Kurokawa, S. Isono, Y. Kohama, S. Kunisada,
S. Sakai, R. Sekine, M. Okubo, M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, C. Cacho, S. Shin, T. Tohyama, K. Tokiwa,
and T. Kondo, Unveiling phase diagram of the lightly doped high-Tc cuprate superconductors with
disorder removed, Nat Commun 14, 4064 (2023).
[67] V. Oliviero, S. Benhabib, I. Gilmutdinov, B. Vig-nolle, L. Drigo, M. Massoudzadegan, M.
Leroux, G. L.
J. A. Rikken, A. Forget, D. Colson, D. Vignolles, and
C. Proust, Magnetotransport signatures of antiferro-magnetism coexisting with charge order in the
trilayer cuprate HgBa₂Ca₂Cu₃O₈₊δ, Nat Commun 13, 1568 (2022).
[68] L. Bellaiche and D. Vanderbilt, Virtual crystal approx-imation revisited: Application to
dielectric and piezo-electric properties of perovskites, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7877 (2000).
[69] M. A. van Veenendaal, G. A. Sawatzky, and W. A. Groen, Electronic structure of Bi₂Sr₂Ca₁−ₓ Yₓ
Cu₂O₈₊δ: Cu 2p x-ray-photoelectron spectra and occupied and unoccupied low-energy states, Phys.
Rev. B 49, 1407 (1994).
[70] A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Angle-resolved photoemission studies of the cuprate
supercon-ductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 473 (2003).
[71] C. Hu, J. Zhao, Q. Gao, H. Yan, H. Rong, J. Huang,
J. Liu, Y. Cai, C. Li, H. Chen, L. Zhao, G. Liu, C. Jin,
Z. Xu, T. Xiang, and X. J. Zhou, Momentum-resolved visualization of electronic evolution in doping
a Mott insulator, Nat Commun 12, 1356 (2021).
[72] B. A. Hunter, J. D. Jorgensen, J. L. Wagner, P. G. Radaelli, D. G. Hinks, H. Shaked, R. L.
Hitterman, and
R. B. Von Dreele, Pressure-induced structural changes in superconducting HgBa₂Can−₁CunO₂n₊₂₊δ (n =
1, 2, 3) compounds, Physica C: Superconductivity 221, 1
(1994).
[73] E. V. Antipov, A. M. Abakumov, and S. N. Putilin, Chemistry and structure of Hg-based
superconducting Cu mixed oxides, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 15, R31 (2002).
[74] A. Iyo, Y. Tanaka, Y. Kodama, H. Kito, K. Tokiwa, and
T. Watanabe, Synthesis and physical properties of mul-tilayered cuprates, Physica C:
Superconductivity and its Applications Proceedings of the 18th International Sym-posium on
Superconductivity (ISS 2005), 445–448, 17
(2006).
[75] A. Iyo, Y. Tanaka, H. Kito, Y. Kodama, P. M. Shi-rage, D. D. Shivagan, H. Matsuhata, K.
Tokiwa, and
T. Watanabe, TC vs n relationship for multilayered High-TC superconductors, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76,
094711 (2007).
[76] E. Pavarini, I. Dasgupta, T. Saha-Dasgupta, O. Jepsen, and O. K. Andersen, Band-structure
trend in hole-doped cuprates and correlation with TCmax, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 047003 (2001).
[77] Z. Hiroi, N. Kobayashi, and M. Takano, Probable hole-doped superconductivity without apical
oxygens in (Ca, Na)2CuO2Cl2, Nature 371, 139 (1994).
[78] Y. Kohsaka, M. Azuma, I. Yamada, T. Sasagawa,
T. Hanaguri, M. Takano, and H. Takagi, Growth of Na-doped Ca2CuO2Cl2 single crystals under high
pressures of several GPa, Journal of the American Chemical So-ciety 124, 12275 (2002).
[79] I. Yamada, A. A. Belik, M. Azuma, S. Harjo,
T. Kamiyama, Y. Shimakawa, and M. Takano, Single-layer oxychloride superconductor Ca2−xCuO2Cl2 with
A-site cation deficiency, Phys. Rev. B 72, 224503 (2005).
[80] T. Sowa, M. Hiratani, and K. Miyauchi, A new chloroox-ocuprate, Ca3Cu2O4Cl2, with an oxygen
defect in-tergrowth, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 84, 178 (1990).
[81] W. Ruan, C. Hu, J. Zhao, P. Cai, Y. Peng, C. Ye,
R. Yu, X. Li, Z. Hao, C. Jin, X. Zhou, Z.-Y. Weng, and Y. Wang, Relationship between the parent
charge transfer gap and maximum transition temperature in cuprates, Science Bulletin 61, 1826
(2016).
[82] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964).
[83] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in-cluding exchange and correlation effects,
Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
[84] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).
[85] A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Ab initio calcu-lations of quasiparticle band
structure in correlated sys-tems: Lda++ approach, Phys. Rev. B 57, 6884 (1998).
[86] G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko,
O. Parcollet, and C. A. Marianetti, Electronic structure calculations with dynamical mean-field
theory, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 865 (2006).
[87] K. Held, Electronic structure calculations using dynam-ical mean field theory, Advances in
Physics 56, 829 (2007).
[88] A. Paul and T. Birol, Applications of DFT+DMFT in materials science, Annual Review of
Materials Research 49, 31 (2019).
[89] J. H. Shim, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Modeling the localized-to-itinerant electronic
transition in the heavy fermion system CeIrIn5, Science 318, 1615 (2007).
[90] K. Haule, T. Birol, and G. Kotliar, Covalency in transition-metal oxides within all-electron
dynamical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 90, 075136 (2014).
[91] K. Haule, Structural predictions for correlated electron materials using the functional
dynamical mean field the-ory approach, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 87, 041005 (2018).
[92] S. Mandal, K. Haule, K. M. Rabe, and D. Vander-bilt, Systematic beyond-DFT study of binary
transi-tion metal oxides, npj Computational Materials 5, 115 (2019).

41


[93] K. Haule, Exact Double Counting in combining the dy-namical mean field theory and the density
functional theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 196403 (2015).
[94] V. I. Anisimov, I. V. Solovyev, M. A. Korotin, M. T. Czyz˙yk, and G. A. Sawatzky,
Density-functional theory and NiO photoemission spectra, Phys. Rev. B 48, 16929 (1993).
[95] A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Antiferromag-netism and d-wave superconductivity in
cuprates: A cluster dynamical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 62, R9283 (2000).
[96] G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, G. Pa´lsson, and G. Biroli, Cellular dynamical mean field approach
to strongly cor-related systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 186401 (2001).
[97] T. A. Maier, M. Jarrell, T. C. Schulthess, P. R. C. Kent, and J. B. White, Systematic study of
d-wave super-conductivity in the 2D repulsive Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 237001 (2005).
[98] A. M. S. Tremblay, B. Kyung, and D. S´en´echal, Pseudo-gap and high-temperature
superconductivity from weak to strong coupling. Towards a quantitative theory, Low Temp. Phys. 32,
424 (2006).
[99] H.-S. Kim, K. Haule, and D. Vanderbilt, Molecular Mott state in the deficient spinel GaV4S8,
Phys. Rev. B 102, 081105 (2020).
[100] O. Rubel, A. Bokhanchuk, S. J. Ahmed, and E. Ass-mann, Unfolding the band structure of
disordered solids: From bound states to high-mobility Kane fermions, Phys. Rev. B 90, 115202
(2014).
[101] D. S´en´echal, D. Perez, and M. Pioro-Ladri`ere, Spectral weight of the Hubbard model through
cluster perturba-tion theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 522 (2000).
[102] T. D. Stanescu and G. Kotliar, Fermi arcs and hid-den zeros of the Green function in the
pseudogap state, Phys. Rev. B 74, 125110 (2006).
[103] S. Verret, J. Roy, A. Foley, M. Charlebois, D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Intrinsic
cluster-shaped den-sity waves in cellular dynamical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 100, 224520
(2019).
[104] C. J. Bolech, S. S. Kancharla, and G. Kotliar, Cellular dynamical mean-field theory for the
one-dimensional ex-tended Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 67, 075110 (2003).
[105] S. S. Kancharla, B. Kyung, D. S´en´echal, M. Civelli,
M. Capone, G. Kotliar, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Anoma-lous superconductivity and its competition with
anti-ferromagnetism in doped Mott insulators, Phys. Rev. B 77, 184516 (2008).
[106] A. Foley, S. Verret, A.-M. S. Tremblay, and D. S´en´echal, Coexistence of superconductivity
and antiferromag-netism in the Hubbard model for cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 99, 184510 (2019).
[107] S. S. Dash and D. S´en´echal, Pseudogap transition within the superconducting phase in the
three-band Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 100, 214509 (2019).
[108] Z. Bai, J. Demmel, J. Dongarra, A. Ruhe, and
H. van der Vorst, Templates for the Solution of Alge-braic Eigenvalue Problems, edited by Z. Bai,
J. Demmel,
J. Dongarra, A. Ruhe, and H. van der Vorst (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2000).
[109] E. Koch, G. Sangiovanni, and O. Gunnarsson, Sum rules and bath parametrization for quantum
cluster theories, Phys. Rev. B 78, 115102 (2008).
[110] K. Haule, Quantum monte carlo impurity solver for clus-ter dynamical mean-field theory and
electronic structure
calculations with adjustable cluster base, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155113 (2007).
[111] J. Kaye, K. Chen, and O. Parcollet, Discrete Lehmann representation of imaginary time Green’s
functions, Phys. Rev. B 105, 235115 (2022).
[112] E. Gull, A. J. Millis, A. I. Lichtenstein, A. N. Rubtsov,
M. Troyer, and P. Werner, Continuous-time monte carlo methods for quantum impurity models, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 83, 349 (2011).
[113] X. Luo, H. Chen, Y. Li, Q. Gao, C. Yin, H. Yan,
T. Miao, H. Luo, Y. Shu, Y. Chen, C. Lin, S. Zhang,
Z. Wang, F. Zhang, F. Yang, Q. Peng, G. Liu, L. Zhao,
Z. Xu, T. Xiang, and X. J. Zhou, Electronic origin of high superconducting critical temperature in
trilayer cuprates, Nat. Phys. , 1 (2023).
[114] P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, F. Tran, R. Laskowski, G. K. H. Madsen, and L. D. Marks, WIEN2k: An
APW+lo pro-gram for calculating the properties of solids, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 074101 (2020).
[115] K. Momma and F. Izumi, Vesta 3 for three-dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and
morphology data, Journal of applied crystallography 44, 1272 (2011).
[116] F. Ronning, K. M. Shen, N. P. Armitage, A. Damascelli,
D. H. Lu, Z.-X. Shen, L. L. Miller, and C. Kim, Anoma-lous high-energy dispersion in angle-resolved
photoemis-sion spectra from the insulating cuprate Ca 2 CuO 2 Cl 2, Phys. Rev. B 71, 094518 (2005).
[117] J. D. Perkins, J. M. Graybeal, M. A. Kastner, R. J. Birgeneau, J. P. Falck, and M. Greven,
Mid-infrared optical absorption in undoped lamellar copper oxides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1621
(1993).
[118] J. P. Falck, J. D. Perkins, A. Levy, M. A. Kastner, J. M. Graybeal, and R. J. Birgeneau,
Midinfrared electrore-flectance in La2CuO4+y , Phys. Rev. B 49, 6246 (1994).
[119] J. D. Perkins, R. J. Birgeneau, J. M. Graybeal, M. A. Kastner, and D. S. Kleinberg,
Midinfrared optical exci-tations in undoped lamellar copper oxides, Phys. Rev. B 58, 9390 (1998).
[120] K. Waku, T. Katsufuji, Y. Kohsaka, T. Sasagawa,
H. Takagi, H. Kishida, H. Okamoto, M. Azuma, and
M. Takano, Charge dynamics of Ca2−xNaxCuO2Cl2 as a correlated electron system with the ideal
tetragonal lattice, Phys. Rev. B 70, 134501 (2004).
[121] R. Schuster, S. Pyon, M. Knupfer, J. Fink, M. Azuma,
M. Takano, H. Takagi, and B. Bu¨chner, Charge-transfer excitons in underdoped Ca2−xNaxCuO2Cl2
studied by electron energy-loss spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 79, 214517 (2009).
[122] R. M. Feenstra and J. A. Stroscio, Tunneling spec-troscopy of the GaAs(110) surface, Journal
of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics Processing and Phenomena 5, 923 (1987).
[123] M. Weimer, J. Kramar, and J. D. Baldeschwieler, Band bending and the apparent barrier height
in scanning tunneling microscopy, Phys. Rev. B 39, 5572 (1989).
[124] B. Kyung, D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Pair-ing dynamics in strongly correlated
superconductivity, Phys. Rev. B 80, 205109 (2009).
[125] J. Mußhoff, A. Kiani, and E. Pavarini, Magnetic re-sponse trends in cuprates and the t−t′
Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 103, 075136 (2021).
[126] B. W. Lebert, M. P. M. Dean, A. Nicolaou, J. Pelli-ciari, M. Dantz, T. Schmitt, R. Yu, M.
Azuma, J.-

42


P. Castellan, H. Miao, A. Gauzzi, B. Baptiste, and
M. d’Astuto, Resonant inelastic x-ray scattering study of spin-wave excitations in the cuprate
parent com-pound Ca2CuO2Cl2, Phys. Rev. B 95, 155110 (2017).
[127] B. W. Lebert, B. Bacq-Labreuil, M. P. M. Dean,
K. Ruotsalainen, A. Nicolaou, S. Huotari, I. Yamada,
H. Yamamoto, M. Azuma, N. B. Brookes, F. Yakhou,
H. Miao, D. Santos-Cottin, B. Lenz, S. Biermann, and
M. d’Astuto, Paramagnon dispersion and damping in doped NaxCa2−xCuO2Cl2, Phys. Rev. B 108, 024506
(2023).
[128] S. Kunisada,  S. Adachi,  S. Sakai,  N. Sasaki,
M. Nakayama, S. Akebi, K. Kuroda, T. Sasagawa,
T. Watanabe, S. Shin, and T. Kondo, Observation of Bogoliubov band hybridization in the optimally
doped trilayer Bi₂Sr₂Ca₂Cu₃O₁₀₊δ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 217001 (2017).
[129] A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza, D. Van-derbilt, and N. Marzari, Wannier90: A
tool for obtain-ing maximally-localised Wannier functions, Computer Physics Communications 178, 685
(2008).
[130] A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, G. Pizzi, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza,
D. Vanderbilt, and N. Marzari, An updated version of wannier90: A tool for obtaining
maximally-localised Wannier functions, Computer Physics Communications 185, 2309 (2014).
[131] N. Gauthier, J. A. Sobota, M. Hashimoto, H. Pfau, D.-
H. Lu, E. D. Bauer, F. Ronning, P. S. Kirchmann, and Z.-X. Shen, Quantum-well states in fractured
crystals of the heavy-fermion material CeCoIn5, Phys. Rev. B 102, 125111 (2020).
[132] T. C. Chiang, Photoemission studies of quantum well states in thin films, Surface Science
Reports 39, 181 (2000).
[133] R. K. Kawakami, E. Rotenberg, H. J. Choi, E. J. Escorcia-Aparicio, M. O. Bowen, J. H. Wolfe,
E. Aren-holz, Z. D. Zhang, N. V. Smith, and Z. Q. Qiu, Quantum-well states in copper thin films,
Nature 398, 132 (1999).
[134] J. J. Paggel, T. Miller, and T.-C. Chiang, Quantum-well states as Fabry-P´erot modes in a
thin-film electron interferometer, Science 283, 1709 (1999).
[135] H. LaBollita and A. S. Botana, Correlated electronic structure of a quintuple-layer
nickelate, Phys. Rev. B 105, 085118 (2022).
[136] D. J. Singh, Electronic structure of HgBa₂Ca2Cu3O8: The role of mercury, Phys. Rev. B 48,
3571 (1993).
[137] D. J. Singh and W. E. Pickett, Unconventional oxy-gen doping behavior in HgBa₂Ca₂Cu₃O₈₊δ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 476 (1994).
[138] L. P. Chan, D. R. Harshman, K. G. Lynn, S. Mas-sidda, and D. B. Mitzi, Pair momentum
distribution in Bi₂Sr₂CaCu₂O₈₊δ measured by positron annihilation: Existence and nature of the
fermi surface, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1350 (1991).
[139] H. Lin, S. Sahrakorpi, R. S. Markiewicz, and A. Ban-sil, Raising Bi-O bands above the fermi
energy level of hole-doped Bi₂Sr₂CaCu₂O₈₊δ and other cuprate super-conductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
097001 (2006).
[140] J. Nokelainen, C. Lane, R. S. Markiewicz, B. Barbiellini,
A. Pulkkinen, B. Singh, J. Sun, K. Pussi, and A. Ban-sil, Ab initio description of the
Bi₂Sr₂CaCu₂O₈₊δ elec-tronic structure, Phys. Rev. B 101, 214523 (2020).
[141] P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X.-G. Wen, Doping a Mott insulator: Physics of high-temperature
superconductiv-ity, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 17 (2006).
[142] G. Sordi, K. Haule, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Finite doping signatures of the Mott transition in
the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 226402 (2010).
[143] H. Alloul, T. Ohno, and P. Mendels, ⁸⁹Y NMR ev-idence for a Fermi-liquid behavior in
YBa2Cu3O6+x, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1700 (1989).
[144] W. W. Warren, R. E. Walstedt, G. F. Brennert, R. J. Cava, R. Tycko, R. F. Bell, and G.
Dabbagh, Cu spin dynamics and superconducting precursor effects in planes above TC in YBa2Cu3O6.7,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1193 (1989).
[145] T. Ito, K. Takenaka, and S. Uchida, Systematic devia-tion from T-linear behavior in the
in-plane resistivity of YBa2Cu3O7−y : Evidence for dominant spin scattering, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70,
3995 (1993).
[146] T. Timusk and B. Statt, The pseudogap in high-temperature superconductors: An experimental
survey, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, 61 (1999).
[147] C. Huscroft, M. Jarrell, Th. Maier, S. Moukouri, and
A. N. Tahvildarzadeh, Pseudogaps in the 2D Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 139 (2001).
[148] Y. Kohsaka, T. Sasagawa, F. Ronning, T. Yoshida,
C. Kim,  T. Hanaguri,  M. Azuma,  M. Takano,
Z. Xun Shen, and H. Takagi, Angle-Resolved Pho-toemission Spectroscopy of (Ca,Na)2CuO2Cl2 Crystals:
Fingerprints of a Magnetic Insulator in a Heavily Un-derdoped Superconductor, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
72, 1018 (2003).
[149] J. Graf, G.-H. Gweon, and A. Lanzara, Universal waterfall-like feature in the spectral
function of high temperature superconductors, Physica C: Superconduc-tivity and its applications
460, 194 (2007).
[150] J. Graf, G.-H. Gweon, K. McElroy, S. Y. Zhou,
C. Jozwiak, E. Rotenberg, A. Bill, T. Sasagawa,
H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, H. Takagi, D.-H. Lee, and A. Lan-zara, Universal high energy anomaly in the
angle-resolved photoemission spectra of high temperature su-perconductors: Possible evidence of
spinon and holon branches, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 067004 (2007).
[151] A. A. Kordyuk, S. V. Borisenko, V. B. Zabolotnyy,
J. Geck, M. Knupfer, J. Fink, B. Bu¨chner, C. T. Lin,
B. Keimer, H. Berger, A. V. Pan, S. Komiya, and
Y. Ando, Constituents of the quasiparticle spectrum along the nodal direction of high-Tc cuprates,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 017002 (2006).
[152] S. V. Borisenko, A. A. Kordyuk, V. Zabolotnyy,
J. Geck, D. Inosov, A. Koitzsch, J. Fink, M. Knupfer,
B. Bu¨chner, V. Hinkov, C. T. Lin, B. Keimer, T. Wolf,
S. G. Chiuzba˘ian, L. Patthey, and R. Follath, Kinks, nodal bilayer splitting, and interband
scattering in YBa2Cu3O6+x, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 117004 (2006).
[153] S. V. Borisenko, A. A. Kordyuk, A. Koitzsch, J. Fink,
J. Geck, V. Zabolotnyy, M. Knupfer, B. Bu¨chner,
H. Berger, M. Falub, M. Shi, J. Krempasky, and
L. Patthey, Parity of the pairing bosons in a high-temperature Pb−Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 bilayer
superconduc-tor by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 067001 (2006).
[154] T. Valla, T. E. Kidd, W.-G. Yin, G. D. Gu, P. D. John-
son, Z.-H. Pan, and A. V. Fedorov, High-energy kink

43


observed in the electron dispersion of high-temperature cuprate superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 167003 (2007).
[155] B. P. Xie, K. Yang, D. W. Shen, J. F. Zhao, H. W. Ou,
J. Weil, S. Y. Gu, M. Arita, S. Qiao, H. Namatame,
M. Taniguchi, N. Kaneko, H. Eisaki, K. D. Tsuei, C. M. Cheng, I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, G. Rossi, Z.
Q. Yang, and
D. L. Feng, High-energy scale revival and giant kink in the dispersion of a cuprate superconductor,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 147001 (2007).
[156] B. Moritz, W. Schmitt, Fand Meevasana, S. Johnston,
E. Motoyama, M. Greven, D. Lu, C. Kim, R. Scalet-tar, Z. Shen, et al., Effect of strong
correlations on the high energy anomaly in hole-and electron-doped high-TC superconductors, New
Journal of Physics 11, 093020 (2009).
[157] W. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Meng, L. Zhao, H. Liu, X. Dong,
W. Lu, J. S. Wen, Z. J. Xu, G. D. Gu, T. Sasagawa,
G. Wang, Y. Zhu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, Z. Zhao,
C. Chen, Z. Xu, and X. J. Zhou, High energy disper-sion relations for the high temperature
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 superconductor from laser-based angle-resolved photoe-mission spectroscopy, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 101, 017002 (2008).
[158] S. Basak, T. Das, H. Lin, J. Nieminen, M. Lin-droos, R. S. Markiewicz, and A. Bansil, Origin
of the high-energy kink in the photoemission spectrum of the high-temperature superconductor
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, Phys. Rev. B 80, 214520 (2009).
[159] X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Meng, W. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zhao, and X. Jia, High resolution
angle-resolved photoemis-sion spectroscopy on Cu-based and Fe-based high-TC superconductors,
physica status solidi (a) 207, 2674 (2010).
[160] H. Sakakibara, H. Usui, K. Kuroki, R. Arita, and
H. Aoki, Two-orbital model explains the higher tran-sition temperature of the single-layer
Hg-cuprate super-conductor compared to that of the La-cuprate super-conductor, Phys. Rev. Lett.
105, 057003 (2010).
[161] H. Sakakibara, H. Usui, K. Kuroki, R. Arita, and
H. Aoki, Origin of the material dependence of TC in the single-layered cuprates, Phys. Rev. B 85,
064501 (2012).
[162] M. B. J. Meinders, H. Eskes, and G. A. Sawatzky, Spectral-weight transfer:  Breakdown of
low-energy-scale sum rules in correlated systems, Phys. Rev. B 48, 3916 (1993).
[163] Y. Wang, Y. He, K. Wohlfeld, M. Hashimoto, E. W. Huang, D. Lu, S.-K. Mo, S. Komiya, C. Jia,
B. Moritz, Z.-X. Shen, and T. P. Devereaux, Emergence of quasi-particles in a doped Mott insulator,
Commun Phys 3, 1 (2020).
[164] S. Sakai, Nonperturbative calculations for spectroscopic properties of cuprate
high-temperature superconduc-tors, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 92, 092001 (2023).
[165] Z. Luo, X. Hu, M. Wang, W. Wu´, and D.-X. Yao, Bi-layer two-orbital model of La3Ni2O7 under
pressure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 126001 (2023).
[166] A. Zunger and O. I. Malyi, Understanding doping of quantum materials, Chem. Rev. 121, 3031
(2021).
[167] S. Lany, J. Osorio-Guill´en, and A. Zunger, Origins of the doping asymmetry in oxides: Hole
doping in NiO versus electron doping in ZnO, Phys. Rev. B 75, 241203 (2007).
[168] S. Ideta, K. Takashima, M. Hashimoto, T. Yoshida,
A. Fujimori, H. Anzai, T. Fujita, Y. Nakashima,
A. Ino, M. Arita, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi, K. Ono,
M. Kubota, D. H. Lu, Z.-X. Shen, K. M. Kojima, and
S. Uchida, Enhanced Superconducting Gaps in the Tri-layer High-Temperature Bi₂Sr₂Ca₂Cu₃O₁₀₊δ
Cuprate Superconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 227001 (2010).
[169] G. R. Stewart, Unconventional superconductivity, Ad-vances in Physics 66, 75 (2017).
[170] H. Alloul, What do we learn from impurities and dis-order in high-TC cuprates?, Frontiers in
Physics 12, 10.3389/fphy.2024.1406242 (2024).
[171] M. Aichhorn, E. Arrigoni, M. Potthoff, and W. Hanke, Antiferromagnetic to superconducting
phase transition in the hole- and electron-doped Hubbard model at zero temperature, Phys. Rev. B
74, 024508 (2006).
[172] M. Civelli, Doping-driven evolution of the supercon-ducting state from a doped Mott
insulator: Cluster dynamical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 79, 195113 (2009).
[173] We have not investigated the competition with antifer-romagnetism, that may also be a factor
explaining the finite doping threshold [105, 106, 195, 196].
[174] C. Weber, Unifying guiding principles for designing op-timized superconductors, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 118, e2115874118 (2021).
[175] T. Honma and P. H. Hor, Unified electronic phase dia-gram for hole-doped high-Tc cuprates,
Physical Review B 77, 184520 (2008).
[176] S. Chakraborty, D. Galanakis, and P. Phillips, Emer-gence of particle-hole symmetry near
optimal doping in high-temperature copper oxide superconductors, Phys-ical Review B 82, 214503
(2010).
[177] K. Haule and G. Kotliar, Avoided criticality in near-optimally doped high-temperature
superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 76, 092503 (2007).
[178] N. S. Vidhyadhiraja, A. Macridin, C. S¸en, M. Jarrell, and M. Ma, Quantum critical point at
finite doping in the 2d hubbard model: A dynamical cluster quantum monte carlo study, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 102, 206407 (2009).
[179] L. Fratino, P. S´emon, G. Sordi, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Pseudogap and superconductivity in
two-dimensional doped charge-transfer insulators, Phys. Rev. B 93, 245147 (2016).
[180] V. J. Emery and S. A. Kivelson, Importance of phase fluctuations in superconductors with
small superfluid density, Nature 374, 434–437 (1995).
[181] N. Kowalski, An analysis of example (2021), available at
https://savoirs.usherbrooke.ca/bitstream/ handle/11143/18438/kowalski_nicolas_MSc_2021.
pdf?sequence=7&isAllowed=y.
[182] T. A. Maier and D. J. Scalapino, Pairfield fluctuations
of a 2d hubbard model, npj Quantum Materials 4, 30 (2019).
[183] Y. Uemura, L. Le, G. Luke, B. Sternlieb, J. Brewer,
R. Kadono, R. Kiefl, S. Kreitzman, and T. Riseman, Probing magnetism and superconductivity of
high-tc systems with positive muons, Physica C: Superconduc-tivity and its Applications 162, 857
(1989).
[184] O. Simard, C.-D. H´ebert, A. Foley, D. S´en´echal, and A.-
M. S. Tremblay, Superfluid stiffness in cuprates: Effect of Mott transition and phase competition,
Phys. Rev. B 100, 094506 (2019).

44


[185] L. Fratino, P. S´emon, G. Sordi, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, An organizing principle for
two-dimensional strongly correlated superconductivity, Sci Rep 6, 22715 (2016).
[186] Y. Zenitani, K. Inari, S. Sahoda, M. Uehara, J. Akim-itsu, N. Kubota, and M. Ayabe,
Superconductivity in (ca, na) 2cacu2o4cl2 the new simplest double-layer cuprate with apical
chlorine, Physica C: Superconduc-tivity 248, 167 (1995).
[187] S. Paeckel,  T. K¨ohler,  S. R. Manmana, and
B.  Lenz,  Matrix-product-state-based  band-lanczos solver  for  quantum  cluster  approaches,
arXiv.org https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.10799 (2023).
[188] Y. Nu´n˜ez Ferna´ndez, M. Jeannin, P. T. Dumitrescu,
T. Kloss, J. Kaye, O. Parcollet, and X. Waintal, Learn-ing Feynman diagrams with tensor trains,
Phys. Rev. X 12, 041018 (2022).
[189] A. Erpenbeck, W.-T. Lin, T. Blommel, L. Zhang,
S. Iskakov, L. Bernheimer, Y. Nu´n˜ez Ferna´ndez, G. Co-hen, O. Parcollet, X. Waintal, and E. Gull,
Tensor train continuous time solver for quantum impurity models, Phys. Rev. B 107, 245135 (2023).
[190] K. Haule, Strong coupling quantum impurity solver on the real and imaginary axis, arXiv.org
(2023).
[191] A. Tanaka, Metal-insulator transition in the two-dimensional Hubbard model: Dual fermion
approach
with Lanczos exact diagonalization, Phys. Rev. B 99, 205133 (2019).
[192] L. Liang, T. I. Vanhala, S. Peotta, T. Siro, A. Harju, and P. To¨rma¨, Band geometry, Berry
curvature, and superfluid weight, Phys. Rev. B 95, 024515 (2017).
[193] M. Charlebois, D. S´en´echal, A.-M. Gagnon, and A.-
M. S. Tremblay, Impurity-induced magnetic moments on the graphene-lattice Hubbard model: An
inhomoge-neous cluster dynamical mean-field theory study, Phys. Rev. B 91, 035132 (2015).
[194] B. Pahlevanzadeh, P. Sahebsara, and D. S´en´echal, Chi-ral p-wave superconductivity in
twisted bilayer graphene from dynamical mean field theory, SciPost Phys. 11, 017 (2021).
[195] D. S´en´echal, P.-L. Lavertu, M.-A. Marois, and A.-
M. Tremblay, Competition between antiferromagnetism and superconductivity in high-TC cuprates,
Physical re-view letters 94, 156404 (2005).
[196] M. Capone and G. Kotliar, Competition between d-wave superconductivity and antiferromagnetism
in the two-dimensional Hubbard model, Phys. Rev. B 74, 054513 (2006).
