Quantum Cluster Theories
Thomas Maier∗
Computational Science and Math Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6114
Mark Jarrell
Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0011
Thomas Pruschke
Theoretical Physics, University of Go¨ttingen, Tammannstr. 1, 37077 Go¨ttingen, Germany
Matthias H. Hettler
Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut fu¨r Nanotechnologie, Postfach 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
(Dated: 2nd November 2018)
Quantum cluster approaches offer new perspectives to study the complexities of macroscopic 
cor-related fermion systems. These approaches can be understood as generalized mean-field theories. 
Quantum cluster approaches are non-perturbative and are always in the thermodynamic limit. Their 
quality can be systematically improved, and they provide complementary information to finite size 
simulations. They have been studied intensively in recent years and are now well es-tablished. 
After a brief historical review, this article comparatively discusses the nature and advantages of 
these cluster techniques. Applications to common models of correlated electron systems are 
reviewed. ¹



Contents
I. Introduction                       1
A. Brief history                      1
B. Corrections to Curie-Weiss theory           3
II. Quantum cluster theories                5
A. Cluster approximation to the locator expansion    6
B. Cluster approximation to the grand potential     9
1. Cluster perturbation theory            9
2. Cellular dynamical mean-field theory        10
3. Dynamical cluster approximation         11
4. Self-consistency scheme              12
C. Discussion                       12
1. Conservation and thermodynamic consistency   13
2. Causality                      13
3. Reducible and irreducible quantities        13
4. Comparison                     14
D. Effective cluster model                 17
E. Phases with broken symmetry             18
1. Uniform magnetic field – Ferromagnetism     18
2. Superconductivity                  19
3. Antiferromagnetic order              20
F. Calculation of susceptibilities             21
G. Disordered systems                   22
H. Alternative cluster methods              24
1. Self-energy functional theory            24
2. Fictive impurity models              25
3. Non-local effects via spectral density approximation25
4. Non-local corrections via projection technique   25
5. Two-site correlations with composite operators  26
III. Quantum cluster solvers                26
∗Electronic address: maierta@ornl.gov
1This article has been submitted to Reviews of Modern Physics.
A. General remarks                    26
B. Perturbative techniques                27
1. Second order perturbation theory         27
2. Fluctuation exchange approximation       28
3. Non-crossing approximation            28
C. Non-perturbative techniques             30
1. Quantum Monte Carlo               30
2. Exact diagonalization               33
3. Wilson’s numerical renormalization group     33
IV. Applications to strongly correlated models     34
A. Complementarity of finite size and quantum cluster simulations35
B. 2D Falicov-Kimball model               36
C. 1D Hubbard model                   37
D. 2D Hubbard model                   39
1. Metal-insulator transition             39
2. Antiferromagnetism and precursors        41
3. Pseudogap at finite doping             43
4. Superconductivity                  45
5. Phase diagram                   48
6. Studies of related models              48
V. Conclusions and perspectives             49
Acknowledgments                    50
References                        50
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Brief history
The theoretical description of interacting many-particle systems remains one of the grand 
challenges in condensed matter physics.  Especially the field of strongly correlated electron 
systems has regained theo-retical and experimental interest with the discovery of

2


heavy Fermion compounds and high-temperature super-conductors. In this class of systems the 
strength of the interactions between particles is comparable to or larger than their kinetic 
energy, i.e. any theory based on a per-turbative expansion around the non-interacting limit is at 
least questionable. Theoretical tools to describe these systems are therefore faced with extreme 
difficulties, due to the non-perturbative nature of the problem. A large body of work has been 
devoted to a direct (numerically) exact solution of finite size systems using exact 
diago-nalization or Quantum Monte Carlo methods. Exact di-agonalization however is severely limited 
by the expo-nential growth of computational effort with system size, while Quantum Monte Carlo 
methods suffer from the sign problem at low temperatures. Another difficulty of these methods 
arises from their strong finite size effects, of-ten ruling out the reliable extraction of low 
energy scales that are important to capture the competition between different ground states often 
present in strongly corre-lated systems.
Mean-field theories are defined in the thermodynamic limit and therefore do not face the finite 
size problems. With applications to a wide variety of extended systems from spin models to models 
of correlated electrons and/or bosons, mean-field theories are extremely popular and ubiquitous 
throughout science. The first mean-field the-ory which gained wide acceptance was developed by P. 
Weiss for spin systems (Weiss, 1907). The Curie-Weiss mean-field theory reduces the complexity of 
the thermo-dynamic lattice spin problem by mapping it onto that of a magnetic impurity embedded in 
a self-consistently determined mean magnetic field.
Generally, mean-field theories divide the infinite num-ber of degrees of freedom into two sets. A 
small set of degrees of freedom is treated explicitly, while the effects of the remaining degrees 
of freedom are summarized as a mean-field acting on the first set. Here, by mean-field theory, we 
refer to the class of approximations which ac-count for the correlations between spatially 
localized de-grees of freedom explicitly, while treating those at longer length scales with an 
effective medium. Such local ap-proximations become exact in the limit of infinite coor-dination 
number or equivalently infinite dimensions D (Itzykson and Drouffe, 1989); however non-local 
correc-tions become important in finite dimensions. The pur-pose of this review is to discuss 
methods for incorporating non-local corrections to local approximations.
Many different local approximations have been de-veloped for systems with itinerant degrees of 
freedom. Early attempts focused on disordered systems, and in-cluded the virtual crystal 
approximation (Nordheim, 1931a,b; Parmenter, 1955; Schoen, 1969) and the average-T matrix 
approximation (Beeby and Edwards, 1962; Schwartz et al., 1971).  However, the most suc-cessful 
local approximations for disordered systems is the Coherent Potential Approximation (CPA) developed 
by Soven (1967) and others (Shiba, 1971; Taylor, 1967). This method is distinguished from the 
others in that it
becomes exact in both the limit of dilute and concen-trated disordered impurity systems, as well as 
the limit of infinite dimensions.
There have been many attempts to extend the CPA formalism to correlated systems, starting with the 
Dy-namical CPA (DCPA) of Kakehashi (2002); Sumi (1974), the XNCA of Kim et al. (1990); Kuramoto 
(1985) and the LNCA of Grewe (1987); Grewe et al. (1988). A great breakthrough was achieved with 
the formulation of the Dynamical Mean-Field Theory (DMFT) (for a review see Georges et al., 1996; 
Pruschke et al., 1995) in the limit of infinite dimensions by Metzner and Vollhardt (1989) and 
Mu¨ller-Hartmann (1989b). The DCPA and the DMFT have been the most successful approaches and employ 
the same mapping between the cluster and the lattice prob-lems. They differ mostly in their 
starting philosophy. The DCPA employs the CPA equations to relate the im-purity solution to the 
lattice whereas in the DMFT the irreducible quantities calculated on the impurity are used to 
construct the lattice quantities.
Despite the success of these mean-field approaches, they share the critical flaw of neglecting the 
effects of non-local fluctuations. Thus they are unable to capture the physics of, e.g. spin waves 
in spin systems, local-ization in disordered systems, or spin-liquid physics in correlated 
electronic systems. Non-local corrections are required to treat even the initial effects of these 
phenom-ena and to describe phase transitions to states described by a non-local order parameter.
The first attempt to add non-local corrections to mean-field theories was due to Bethe (1935) by 
adding correc-tions to the Curie-Weiss mean-field theory. This was achieved by mapping the lattice 
problem onto a self-consistently embedded finite-size spin cluster composed of a central site and z 
nearest neighbors embedded in a mean-field. For small z, the resulting theory provides a remarkably 
large and accurate correction to the transi-tion temperature (Kikuchi, 1951; Suzuki, 1986).
Many attempts have been made to apply similar ideas to disordered electronic systems (Gonis, 1992). 
Most ap-proaches were hampered by the difficulty of constructing a fully causal theory, with 
positive spectral functions. Several causal theories were developed including the em-bedded cluster 
method (Gonis, 1992) and the molecu-lar CPA (MCPA) by Tsukada (1969) (for a review see Ducastelle, 
1974). These methods generally are obtained from the local approximation by replacing the impurity 
by a finite size cluster in real space. As a result these ap-proaches suffer from the lack of 
translational invariance, since the cluster has open boundary conditions and only the surface sites 
couple to the mean-field.
Similar effort has been expended to find cluster ex-tensions to the DMFT, including most notably 
the Dy-namical Cluster Approximation (DCA) (Hettler et al., 2000, 1998) and the Cellular Dynamical 
Mean-Field The-ory (CDMFT) (Kotliar et al., 2001). Both cluster ap-proaches reduce the complexity 
of the lattice problem by mapping it to a finite size cluster self-consistently em-

3


bedded in a mean-field. As in the classical case, the self-consistency condition reflects the 
translationally in-variant nature of the original lattice problem. The main difference with their 
classical counterparts arises from the presence of quantum fluctuations. Mean-field theories for 
quantum systems with itinerant degrees of freedom cut off spatial fluctuations but take full 
account of tempo-ral fluctuations. As a result the mean-field is a time-or respectively frequency 
dependent quantity. Even an effective cluster problem consisting of only a single site (DMFT) is 
hence a highly non-trivial many-body prob-lem. CDMFT and DCA mainly differ in the nature of the 
effective cluster problem. The CDMFT shares an identi-cal mapping of the lattice to the cluster 
problem with the MCPA, and hence also violates translational symmetries on the cluster. The DCA 
maps the lattice to a periodic and therefore translationally invariant cluster.
A numerically more tractable cluster approxima-tion to the thermodynamic limit was developed by 
Gros and Valenti (1994).  In this formalism the self-consistent coupling to a mean-field is 
neglected. This leads to a theory in which the self-energy of an isolated finite size cluster is 
used to approximate the lattice prop-agator. As shown by S´en´echal et al. (2000), this cluster 
extension of the Hubbard-I approximation is obtained as the leading order approximation in a 
strong-coupling ex-pansion in the hopping amplitude and hence this method was named Cluster 
Perturbation Theory (CPT).
Generally, cluster formalisms share the basic idea to approximate the effects of correlations in 
the infinite lat-tice problem with those on a finite size quantum cluster. We refer to this class 
of techniques as quantum cluster theories. In contrast to Finite System Simulations (FSS), these 
techniques are built for the thermodynamic limit. In this review we focus on the three most 
established quantum cluster approaches, the DCA, the CDMFT and the CPT formalisms. The CDMFT 
approach was origi-
sions of the effective cluster problem, generalizations to symmetry broken states and the 
calculation of response functions are presented in Secs. II.D, II.E and II.F. The remainder of this 
section is devoted to describe the ap-plication of the DCA formalism to disordered systems in Sec. 
II.G and to a brief discussion of alternative methods proposed to introduce non-local corrections 
to the DMFT method in Sec. II.H.  In Sec. III we review the various perturbative and 
non-perturbative techniques available to solve the effective self-consistent cluster problem of 
quantum cluster approaches. We include a detailed as-sessment of their advantages and limitations. 
Although numerous applications of quantum cluster approaches to models of many-particle systems are 
found in the litera-ture, this field is still in its footsteps and currently very active. A large 
body of work has been concentrated on the Hubbard model.  We review the progress made on this model 
in Section IV together with applications to several other strongly correlated models. Finally, Sec. 
V concludes the review by stressing the limitations of quan-tum cluster approaches and proposing 
possible directions for future research in this field.


B. Corrections to Curie-Weiss theory

As an intuitive example of the formalism developed in the next sections we consider a systematic 
cluster exten-sion of the Curie-Weiss mean-field theory for a lattice of classical interacting 
spins. This discussion is espe-cially helpful to illustrate many new aspects of cluster approaches 
as compared to finite size simulations. The quality of this approach, and its convergence and 
critical properties will be demonstrated with a simple example, the one-dimensional Ising model
H = −J Σ σiσi₊₁ − h Σ σi      (1)
nally formulated for general, possibly non-orthogonal ba-              i        i
sis sets. In this review we restrict the discussion to the

usual, completely localized orthogonal basis set and refer the reader to Kotliar et al. (2001) for 
the generalization to arbitrary basis sets.
The organization of this article is as follows: To famil-iarize the reader with the concept of 
cluster approaches, we develop in section I.B a cluster generalization of the Curie-Weiss 
mean-field theory for spin systems. Section
II sets up the theoretical framework of the CDMFT, DCA and CPT formalisms by presenting two 
derivations based on different starting philosophies. The derivation based on the locator expansion 
in Sec. II.A is analogous to the cluster generalization of the Curie-Weiss mean-field method and 
thus is physically very intuitive. The derivation based on the cluster approximation to dia-grams 
defining the grand potential in Sec. II.B is closely related to the reciprocal space derivation of 
the DMFT by Mu¨ller-Hartmann (1989b). The nature of the different quantum cluster approaches 
together with their advan-tages and weaknesses are assessed in Sec. II.C. Discus-
where σi =  1 are classical spins, h is an external mag-netic field and the exchange integral J > 0 
acts between nearest neighbors only, favoring ferromagnetism. The generalization of this approach 
to higher dimensions and quantum spin systems is straightforward.
We start by dividing the infinite lattice into N/Nc clus-ters of size Nc (see Fig. 3) with origin 
x˜ and the exchange integral Jij into intra- (Jc) and inter-cluster (δJ) parts

J(x˜i − x˜j) = Jcδₓ˜i,x˜j + δJ(x˜i − x˜j)   (2)
where each of the terms is a matrix in the Nc cluster sites. The central approximation of cluster 
theories is to retain correlation effects within the cluster and neglect them between the clusters. 
A natural formalism to implement this approximation is the locator expansion. The 
spin-susceptibility χij = β( σiσj   σi σj ), where β = 1/T is the inverse temperature, can be 
written as a locator expansion in the inter-cluster part δJ of the exchange

4


interaction, around the cluster limit χᵒ = χ(δJ = 0) as
cluster sites is obtained by averaging or coarse-graining over the superlattice wave-vectors q˜

χ(x˜i − x˜j) = χᵒδₓ˜ ,ₓ˜ + χᵒ Σ δJ(x˜i − x˜l)χ(x˜l − x˜j) (3)

χ¯(Q) =
Nc Σ

χ(Q, q˜) =
1
.  (9)


where we used again a matrix notation in the Nc cluster
sites. By using the translational invariance of quantities in the superlattice x˜, this expression 
can be simplified in
N        1/χo(Q)  Γ(Q)
q˜

with the hybridization function

the reciprocal space q˜ of x˜ to
Nc Σ
δJ²(Q, q˜)χ(Q, q˜)


χ(q˜) = χᵒ + χᵒδJ(q˜)χ(q˜) .     (4)
This locator expansion has two well-defined limits. For an infinite size cluster it recovers the 
exact result since the surface to volume ratio vanishes making δJ irrelevant, and thus χ = χᵒ. For 
a single site cluster, Nc = 1, it recovers the Curie-Weiss mean-field theory. This is intuitively 
clear since for Nc = 1 fluctuations between all sites are neglected. With the susceptibility of a 
single isolated site χᵒ = 1/T and δJ(q˜ = 0) = J(q = 0) = J, we obtain for the uniform 
susceptibility
1 + Nc   δJ(Q, q˜)χ(Q, q˜)
This follows from the fact that the isolated cluster suscep-tibility χᵒ(Q) does not depend on the 
integration variable q˜ in Eq. (9).
This expression defines the effective cluster model
Hc = −  J¯(Q)σ(Q)σ(−Q) − hσ(Q = 0)
Q
−  δJ(Q, q˜)σ(Q)⟨σ(−Q − q˜)⟩ ,   (11)
Q,q˜
1        1          where σ(Q) (σ(q)) denotes the cluster (lattice) Fourier

χ(q = 0) = 1/χo − J(q = 0) = T − T    (5)
the mean-field result with critical temperature Tc = J. For cluster sizes larger than one, 
translational sym-
metry within the cluster is violated since the clusters have open boundary conditions and δJ only 
couples sites on the surface of the clusters. As detailed in the next section, this shortcoming can 
be formally overcome and translational invariance restored by considering an anal-ogous expression 
to the locator expansion (4) in the Fourier space Q of the cluster
χ(Q, q˜) = χᵒ(Q) + χᵒ(Q)δJ(Q, q˜)χ(Q, q˜) 1
=            ,        (6)
1/χo(Q) − δJ(Q, q˜)
transform of σi and . . . the expectation value calcu-
lated with respect to the cluster Hamiltonian  c. As in the Curie-Weiss theory, the cluster model 
is used to self-consistently determine the order parameter σ(Q + q˜) = σ(Q) δ(q˜) in the 
ferromagnetic state. In the paramag-netic state, the susceptibility calculated in the cluster model 
takes the same form as the coarse-grained result Eq. (9) obtained from the locator expansion.
The uniform susceptibility χ(Q = 0, q˜ = 0) contains information about the nature of this cluster 
approach, its critical properties and its convergence with cluster size. The sum in Eq. (8) may be 
solved analytically
J¯(Q = 0) = J(Nc/π) sin(π/Nc) .    (12)
The isolated cluster susceptibility χᵒ(Q) can also be cal-culated analytically by using the 
transfer matrix method

with analogous relations for the intra- and inter-cluster parts of J
δJ(Q, q˜) = J(Q + q˜) − J¯(Q)     (7)
to give (Goldenfeld, 1992)

χᵒ(Q = 0) = β exp(2K)

1 − (tanh(K))Nc
1 + (tanh(K))Nc


,  (13)

J¯(Q) = Nc   J(Q + q˜) .     (8)
q˜

Here, q˜ is a vector in the reciprocal space of x˜, and Q
where K = βJ¯(Q = 0) = βJ(N /π) sin(π/N ). With these expressions the uniform lattice 
susceptibility Eq. (6) becomes

is a vector in the reciprocal space of the cluster sites. The Fourier transform of the exchange 
integral is given by J(Q + q˜) = J cos(Q + q˜), the intra-cluster exchange
1
χ(T ) = 1/χo(Q = 0) − δJ(Q = 0, q˜ = 0)
1
(14)

is J¯(Q), while the inter-cluster exchange is δJ(Q, q˜). As
= 1/χo(Q = 0) − J (1 − (N /π) sin(π/N )) .
we will see in the next section, the resulting formalism                      c        c

is analogous to the dynamical cluster approximation for itinerant fermion systems.
In analogy to the Curie-Weiss theory, the lattice sys-tem can now be mapped onto an effective 
cluster model embedded in a mean-field since correlations between the clusters are neglected. The 
susceptibility restricted to
The cluster estimate of the lattice susceptibility interpo-lates between the Curie-Weiss result and 
the exact lattice result as Nc increases. It may be used to reveal some of the properties of 
cluster approximations and to compare the cluster results to both the finite-size calculation and 
the exact result in the thermodynamic limit.




5


4


3                    Cluster mean-field
Finite size

2


1


00       10       20       30       40
Nc

Figure 1 The cluster and finite-size estimates of the uniform lattice susceptibility versus cluster 
size when J = 1 and T = 0.7.


First, both the cluster mean-field result Eq. (14) and the finite-size result Eq. (13) with K = βJ 
may be re-garded as an approximation to the thermodynamic re-sult. However, as illustrated in Fig. 
1, the cluster mean-field result converges more quickly as a function of cluster size Nc than the 
finite size result. This reflects the supe-rior starting point of the cluster approximation 
compared to the finite-size calculation. The cluster approximation is an expansion about the 
mean-field result, whereas the finite-size calculation is an expansion about the atomic limit.
5

with the critical temperature Tc > 0, whereas the exact susceptibility in this regime χ(T )  β exp 
(2βJ) does not diverge until zero temperature. This discrepancy is ex-pected in cluster 
approximations, since they treat long length scales which drive the transition in a mean-field way 
and therefore neglect long wave-length modes which eventually suppress the transition. Hence, 
cluster ap-proximations generally predict finite transition tempera-tures independent of 
dimensionality due to their residual mean-field character. With increasing cluster size how-ever, 
the transitions are expected to be systematically suppressed by the inclusion of longer-ranged 
fluctuations. For cluster sizes larger than one, all three regions are evident in the plot of the 
cluster mean-field estimate of the inverse susceptibility, shown in the inset to Fig. 2. For Nc = 8 
and Nc = 16, the high and low tempera-ture parts are seen as straight lines on the plot in the 
inset, with the crossover region in between. In numeri-cal simulations with significant sources of 
numerical noise especially close to the transition, it is extremely difficult to resolve the true 
low-temperature mean-field behav-ior. Exponents extracted from fits to the susceptibility in these 
simulations will more likely reflect the properties
of the intermediate temperature regime.
Despite the large deviations of the cluster result from the exact result low temperatures, we may 
still ex-tract the correct physics through finite size extrapola-tion.  In general, for a system 
where the correlations

build like ξ ∼ T −Tc  , we expect Tc ∼ Tc − aLc  ,
 

ter result analytically. For large Nc, the character of the susceptibility Eq. (14) can be split 
into three regimes. At very high temperatures
the linear cluster size, and a is a positive real con-
stant (Suzuki, 1986). However, for the 1D Ising system,
ξ   ¹ exp (βJ), so more care must be taken.  Fortu-nately, an analytic expression for the 
transition temper-ature may be extracted from Eq. (14). For large clus-

  1  
χ(T ) ≈
for T ≫ J     (15)
  ₂
 

    ₄ 
		


where Θ ≈ 2J + J  π  2. At intermediate temperatures,
   βJ   π  2!
is shown in the main frame of Fig. 2 with the circles de-picting the numerical values for Tc and 
the solid line their asymptotic behavior.

χ(T )  βe²βJ 1
3  Nc
for J ≫ T ≫ Tc .
(16)

II. QUANTUM CLUSTER THEORIES

The true critical behavior of the system can be resolved by studying the properties of this 
intermediate temper-ature regime. At both high and intermediate tempera-tures, the susceptibility 
differs from the exact result by corrections of order  (1/N ²). In general, cluster meth-ods with 
periodic boundary conditions have corrections
In this section we provide two derivations of quantum cluster approaches for systems with itinerant 
quantum degrees of freedom. The locator expansion in Sec. II.A is analogous to the cluster 
extension of the Curie-Weiss mean-field theory developed in the preceding section. Sec. II.B 
provides a microscopic derivation based on clus-

2
c
the cluster.
c = N ¹/D is the linear size of
ter approximations to the thermodynamic grand poten-tial. A detailed discussion of the nature of 
quantum

At low temperatures, very close to the transition to the ferromagnetic state, deviations from the 
exact result are far larger. Here, for large clusters
 Nc  
χ(T ) ∼ T − T ,        (17)
cluster approaches and the effective cluster model is pre-
sented in Secs. II.C and II.D. Generalizations for sym-metry broken phases, the calculation of 
susceptibilities and the application to disordered systems is explained in Secs. II.E, II.F and 
II.G and a brief discussion of alter-native cluster methods is presented in Sec. II.H.

6


1                                 niσ = c† c
is their corresponding number density, and



0.75




T/J
Uij denotes the Coulomb repulsion between electrons on sites i and j. The hopping amplitude between 
sites i and j is denoted by tij, its local contribution tii = Qₒ and



0.5
1.50     1     2     3

1

0.5
its Fourier transform to reciprocal space is the dispersion
Qk. In this section we limit the discussion to the regular Hubbard model with a purely local 
interaction Uij = U (1 − δσσ′ )δij . The more general case of finite non-local

0.25
0

-0.5

-1
Nc=1 Nc=2 Nc=8 Nc=16
interactions Uij for i = j is discussed in Sec. II.B.
The central quantity upon which we build the loca-tor expansion is the single-particle 
thermodynamic Green

00     0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1
1/Nc
Figure 2 Transition temperature for the 1D Ising model ver-
function (τ is the imaginary time, Tτ the corresponding
time ordering operator, β = 1/T the inverse temperature and ωn are the fermionic Matsubara 
frequencies)

sus the inverse cluster size when J = 1 obtained with the cluster mean-field approach. For large 
clusters, Tc  1/Nc, shown as a solid line. Inset: The inverse susceptibility ver-sus temperature. 
The Curie-Weiss behavior at low T where
Gij,σ(τ ) = −⟨Tτ ciσ

∫
(τ )c†
⟩     (19)


(2n + 1)π

1/χ(T ) is linear in T , illustrates that the transition is always
mean-field like. The true critical behavior of the transition is seen in the crossover region near 
T = J.
Gij,σ(iωn) =
0
dτeⁱωnτ Gij,σ(τ ) ; ωn =
β
(20)



A. Cluster approximation to the locator expansion

In this section, we derive a number of cluster for-malisms for itinerant many body systems using an 
anal-ogous approach to that discussed in Sec. I.B for classical spin systems. For simplicity we 
assume in this section that no symmetry breaking occurs; the treatment of sym-metry broken phases 
is discussed in Sec. II.E. The basic idea is to write down a locator expansion, i.e. an expan-sion 
in space around a finite-size cluster. This approach is not only intuitive but also allows us to 
assess the nature of quantum cluster approximations. As with their classi-cal counterparts, quantum 
cluster theories approximate the lattice problem with many degrees of freedom by an effective 
cluster problem with few degrees of freedom em-bedded in an external bath or mean-field created 
from the remaining degrees of freedom. By neglecting correlations that extend beyond the cluster 
size, one can then for-mulate a theory in which the lattice system is replaced by an effective 
cluster embedded in a mean-field host. While the formalism derived here is analogous to the 
for-malism discussed in Sec. I.B for spin systems, there are significant differences. Since we are 
dealing with itiner-ant fermions, the theory is built upon the single-particle


or respectively its analytical continuation Gij,σ(z) =
ciσ, cjσ z to complex frequencies z.
To set up a suitable notation for cluster schemes, we
divide the D-dimensional lattice of N sites into a set of finite-size clusters each with Nc sites 
of linear size Lc such that Nc = LD, and resolve the first Brillouin zone into a corresponding set 
of reduced zones which we call cells. This notation is illustrated in Fig. 3 for Nc = 4 site 
clus-ters. For larger cluster sizes and more complex cluster geometries we refer the reader to 
Jarrell et al. (2001b). Care should be taken so that the point group symmetry of the clusters does 
not differ too greatly from that of the original lattice (Betts and Stewart, 1997). We use the 
coordinate x˜ to label the origin of the clusters and X to label the Nc sites within a cluster, so 
that the site
indices of the original lattice x = X + x˜. The points x˜ form a superlattice with a reciprocal 
space labeled by k˜. The reciprocal space corresponding to the sites X within
a cluster shall be labeled K, with Kα = nα 2π/Lc and integer nα. Then the wave-vectors in the full 
Brillouin zone are given by k = K + k˜.
With these conventions, the Fourier transforms of a given function f (X, x˜) for intra- and 
inter-cluster coor-dinates are defined as
f (X, x˜) = Nc Σ eⁱᵏ˜·x˜f (X, k˜)     (21)

tion function, and the mean-field is dynamical due to the
itinerant nature of the particles.
This derivation is illustrated on the example of the extended Hubbard model
f (X, k˜) =  e−ⁱᵏ˜·x˜f (X, x˜)     (22)
x˜
f (X, k˜) =  1   eⁱ⁽K⁺ᵏ˜)·Xf (K, k˜)   (23)
Nc
Σ  †   1 Σ                     Σ K

		
Here i and j are lattice site indices, the operators c†    To separate out the cluster degrees of 
freedom, the (ciσ ) create (destroy) an electron with spin σ on site i,   hopping amplitude t and 
the self-energy Σ (defined from

7















Figure 3 Definition of the coordinates in real (left) and recip-rocal (right) space illustrated for 
Nc = 4 site clusters. The origin of a cluster is labeled by x˜, the sites within a clus-
ter by X. The reciprocal space to X is labeled by K, the wave-vectors of the superlattice, i.e. 
within a cell by k˜.

the Green function via the Dyson equation G−¹ = G−¹
Σ with the non-interacting Green function G₀) is split into intra- and inter-cluster parts
t(x˜i − x˜j) = tcδₓ˜i,x˜j + δt(x˜i − x˜j )    (25)
quantum cluster approaches are good approximations to systems with significant screening, where 
non-local corre-lations are expected to be short-ranged. Quantum clus-ter approaches are 
particularly powerful because the re-maining self-energy term Σc(z) implicitly contained in the 
propagator g(z) in Eq. (30) is restricted to the clus-ter degrees of freedom. Hence it can be 
calculated non-perturbatively in an effective cluster model as a func-
tional Σc(z) = F[G¯ (z)], where
G¯ (z) = Nc   G(k˜, z)      (31)
N
k˜
is the k˜-averaged or coarse-grained G(k˜, z), i.e.  the Green function restricted to the cluster. 
As discussed in the next section this approximation is consistent with neglecting inter-cluster 
momentum conservation, i.e. ne-
glecting the phase factors eⁱᵏ˜·ˣ˜ on the vertices of the self-energy diagrams.
Using the expression (30) for the lattice Green function and the fact that g(z) does not depend on 
k˜, the coarse-grained Green function G¯ can be written as

Σ(x˜i − x˜j, z) = Σc(z)δₓ˜i,x˜j + δΣ(x˜i − x˜j, z) . (26)
All the quantities are Nc Nc matrices in the cluster sites, tc = t(x˜ = 0) and Σc(z) = Σ(x˜ = 0, z) 
are the intra-cluster hopping and self-energy, while δt(x˜) and δΣ(x˜, z)
are the corresponding inter-cluster quantities only finite
G¯ (z) = [g−¹(z) − Γ(z)]−¹ ,     (32)
with a hybridization function Γ defined by
−1
Nc Σ  ˜  ˜

for x˜ = 0.
With these definitions we write the Green function
Γ(z) =
 + N
δt(k)G(k, z)
k˜

using a locator expansion, an expansion in δt and δΣ


 Nc Σ  ˜  ˜    
	


G(x˜i − x˜j, z) = g(z)δₓ˜ix˜j + g(z)  [δt(x˜i − x˜l)
l
+ δΣ(x˜i − x˜l, z)]G(x˜l − x˜j, z)  (27) where the Nc × Nc matrix
g(z) = [(z + µ) − tc − Σc(z)]−¹    (28)
is the Green function of the cluster decoupled from the re-mainder of the system (µ is the chemical 
potential). Since translational invariance in the superlattice x˜ is preserved, this expression may 
be simplified by Fourier transforming the inter-cluster coordinates to give
G(k˜, z) = g(z) + g(z)[δt(k˜) + δΣ(k˜, z)]G(k˜, z) . (29)
The central approximation that unites all cluster for-malisms is to truncate the self-energy to the 
cluster, by neglecting δΣ to arrive at
G(k˜, z) = g(z) + g(z)δt(k˜)G(k˜, z)
= [g−¹(z) − δt(k˜)]−¹ .     (30)
As we discuss below, this approximation corresponds to truncating the potential energy to the 
cluster while keep-ing all the contributions to the kinetic energy. Therefore
Its physical content is that of an effective amplitude for fermionic hopping processes from the 
cluster into the host and back again into the cluster. The denominator in Eq. (33) is a correction 
that excludes the cluster from the effective medium. Γ(z) thus plays an analogous role to that of 
the internal magnetic field in mean-field ap-proximations of spin systems. However, due to the 
itin-erant character of the fermionic degrees of freedom, it is a dynamical quantity.
Both the CPT and the CDMFT formalisms may be defined at this point. A self-consistent set of 
equations is formed from G as a functional of Σc using Eq. (30) together with Eq. (28), and with an 
appropriate choice of a cluster solver (see Sec. III), Σc as a functional of
G¯ . In the CDMFT approximation the hybridization Γ is determined self-consistently with Eq. (33), 
i.e. from the
translational invariance of the super-lattice. The result-ing self-consistency cycle is discussed 
in Sec. II.B.4. The CPT formalism is obtained when Γ is neglected. The Green function g(z) then 
becomes the Green function of an isolated cluster and the CPT result for the lat-tice Green 
function is obtained immediately via Eq. (30) without self-consistency. Thus the renormalization of 
the cluster degrees of freedom due to the coupling to the host

8


described by Γ is neglected in the CPT but included in the CDMFT formalism.
The DCA formalism may be motivated by the de-mand to restore translational invariance within the 
clus-ter. Since the inter-cluster hopping δt(k˜) is finite for
Along the lines presented above, the DCA cluster self-energy Σc(K, z) is calculated as a functional 
of the coarse-grained Green function
G¯(K, z) = Nc Σ G(K + k˜, z)
sites on the surface of the cluster and zero for bulk sites,               N
k
only surface sites hybridize with the host. Hence trans-                     1

lational invariance with respect to the cluster sites X is
violated. The cause of this violation can be seen by rep-resenting the hopping integral t(k˜) as 
the intra-cluster Fourier transform of the dispersion QK+k˜ using Eq. (23),



= g−1(K, z) − Γ(K, z)    (42)
which defines the DCA hybridization function
Nc Σk˜ δt²(K + k˜)G(K + k˜, z)

i j  Nc
K
K+k                     N   k

The violation of translational symmetry is caused by the
phase factors eⁱᵏ˜·⁽Xi −Xj ) associated with the superlattice wave-vectors k˜. Thus translational 
symmetry can be re-stored by neglecting these phase-factors, or equivalently,
by multiplying [t(k˜)]Xi Xj with the k˜-dependent phase
e−ik˜·(Xi−Xj ),
The self-consistent procedure to determine the DCA clus-
ter self-energy Σc(K, z) is analogous to CDMFT and dis-cussed in detail in Sec. II.B.4.
This locator expansion yields a very natural physi-cal interpretation of cluster approximations. We 
note that the potential energy may be written as Tr (ΣG) (Fetter and Walecka, 1971), where the 
trace runs over cluster sites, superlattice wave-vectors, frequency and

[tDCA
(k˜)]

Xi Xj
= [t(k˜)]

Xi Xj
e−ik˜·(Xi −Xj )
spin.   As detailed above,  the central approxima-tion of cluster expansions is the neglect of the 
term

=  1   eiK·(Xi −Xj )Q
Nc
K
K+k˜
. (35)
δΣ(k˜, z)G(k˜, z) in Eq. (29). Thus the approximation
δΣ(z) = 0 essentially neglects the inter-cluster correc-tions to the potential energy in all 
calculated lattice

Since tDCA is fully cyclic in the cluster sites, the DCA intra- and inter-cluster hopping integrals 
can be written as cluster Fourier transforms
quantities. On the other hand, the kinetic energy is iden-tified as Tr (tG). Since its 
inter-cluster contribution is not neglected, the kinetic and potential energy contribu-tions are 
not treated on equal footing. Indeed this is the
 1  Σ     Q¯    (36)
[t   ]    =     eiK·(Xi−Xj )           essential difference between cluster mean-field approxi-

c,DCA XiXj                 K
c K
mations and finite size calculations. In the former the
potential energy of the lattice is truncated to that of the

hδtDCA
(k˜)
X X
=  1   eⁱK·⁽Xi −Xj )δt(K + k˜()37)
N
cluster whereas the kinetic energy is not. This leads to a


with
i j    c K
self-consistent theory, generally (but not always) with a
single-particle coupling between the cluster and the host.
In the latter both the kinetic and potential energies of the lattice are truncated to their cluster 
counterparts.

Q¯K
= Nc  Q
N
k˜
K+k˜
(38)
Therefore we might expect cluster methods to converge more quickly as a function of cluster size, 
compared to

δt(K + k˜) = Q

K+k˜
− Q¯K
.      (39)
finite size techniques, for metallic systems with extended
states and significant screening. That this is indeed the case was illustrated in the previous 
section for classical

Since the DCA intra- and inter-cluster hopping inte-
grals retain translational invariance within the cluster, the DCA cluster self-energy Σc and 
hybridization func-tion Γ are translationally invariant. The lattice Green function, Eq. (30) hence 
becomes diagonal in cluster Fourier space
G(K + k˜, z) = g(K, z) + g(K, z)δt(K + k˜)G(K + k˜, z)
spin systems (see Fig. 1).
For completeness we note that non-local interaction terms, e.g. a nearest neighbor Coulomb 
repulsion Uij can be treated in a similar manner by splitting it into intra-(Uc) and inter-cluster 
(δU ) parts. A similar locator ex-pansion to Eq. (30) or respectively Eq. (40) is then writ-ten 
down with respect to the inter-cluster part δU for the corresponding susceptibility (in this case 
this would

1
=
g−1(K, z) − δt(K + k˜)
with the Green function decoupled from the host
(40)
be the charge susceptibility). As a result, an additional coarse-grained interaction Uc acts within 
the cluster (see also Sec. II.B), and the locator expansion in δU leads to an additional 
self-consistency on the two-particle level. For a cluster size of Nc = 1 this formalism corresponds

g(K, z) = [z − Q¯K + µ − Σc(K, z)]−¹ .   (41)
to the extended DMFT (Smith and Si, 2000). A first ap-

9


plication of this extended cluster algorithm to the 2D t-J model for Nc > 1 was discussed in Maier 
(2003).

B. Cluster approximation to the grand potential

In this section we provide a microscopic derivation of the CPT, the CDMFT and the DCA formalisms 
based on different cluster approximations to the diagrammatic expression for the grand potential. 
The advantage of this approach is that it allows us to employ almost all of the diagrammatic 
technology which has been developed in the past several decades to a new set of cluster 
for-malisms. Furthermore we are able to asses the quality of cluster approximations regarding their 
thermodynamic properties. The most significant disadvantage is that the formalism developed here 
only applies to systems which are amenable to a diagrammatic expansion.
The following ideas will be illustrated on the extended Hubbard model Eq. (18). We use the notation 
introduced in Sec. II.A, Fig. 3, i.e. the cluster centers are denoted
by x˜ and sites within the cluster by X. The wave-vectors k˜ and K are their respective conjugates.
Baym and Kadanoff (1961) (see also Baym, 1962) showed that thermodynamically consistent 
approxima-tions may be constructed by requiring that the single-particle self-energy Σ fulfills
δΦ[G]
Prominent examples of conserving approximations in-clude the Hartree-Fock theory and the 
fluctuation ex-change approximation (Bickers et al., 1989). As exempli-fied by these theories, the 
typical approach to construct a conserving approximation is to restrict the diagrams in Φ to a 
certain sub-class, usually the lowest-order (in the interaction U) diagrams. The resulting 
weak-coupling approximations however usually fail for systems where the interaction U is of the 
same order or larger than the bandwidth.
Quantum cluster approaches go a different route: In-stead of neglecting classes of diagrams in Φ, 
quantum cluster approaches reduce the infinite number of degrees of freedom over which Φ is 
evaluated to those of a fi-nite size cluster. In contrast to perturbative approaches however, all 
classes of diagrams are kept.

1. Cluster perturbation theory

The simplest way to reduce the degrees of freedom in Φ[G] is to replace the full lattice Green 
function G(k˜, z) by the Green function g(z) = [(z + µ)   tc  Σc(z)]−¹
of an isolated cluster of size Nc. Consequently, the self-energy Σc = δΦ[g]/δg obtained from Φ is 
the self-energy of an isolated finite size cluster. This however leads to a theory which lacks 
self-consistency. Moreover one has to make the ad-hoc assumption that the lattice self-energy

G−¹ − G−¹ = Σ =
,     (44)
δG
is identical to the one obtained from the cluster, Σc. The
left hand side of Eq. (44) then yields the form for the CPT

i.e. is obtained as a functional derivative of the Baym-Kadanoff Φ-functional with respect to the 
Green function G and that the approximation is self-consistent (via the left hand identity). The 
Baym-Kadanoff generating func-tional Φ[G, U] is diagrammatically defined as a skeletal graph sum 
over all distinct compact closed connected di-agrams constructed from the Green function G and the 
interaction U. Thus, the diagrammatic form of the ap-proximate generating functional together with 
an appro-priate set of Dyson and Bethe-Salpeter equations, com-pletely defines the diagrammatic 
formalism.
As described in standard textbooks (Abrikosov et al., 1963) the relation between the grand 
potential functional Ω and the Φ-functional is expressed in terms of the linked cluster expansion 
as
Ω[G, U] = −kBT {Φ[G, U] − Tr ln(−G) − Tr(ΣG)} ,

where the trace indicates summation over cluster sites X, superlattice wave-vectors k˜, frequency 
and spin. With
the condition (44), the grand potential is stationary with respect to G, i.e. δΩ/δG = 0. Such 
approximations are thermodynamically consistent, i.e. observables cal-culated from the Green 
function G agree with those cal-culated as derivatives of the grand potential Ω. As shown by Baym 
(1962) the requirement (44) together with mo-mentum and energy conservation at the vertices also 
as-sures that the approximation preserves Ward identities,
i.e. satisfies conservation laws.
lattice Green function
G(k˜, z) = [G−¹(k˜, z)) − Σc(z)]−¹ ,   (46)
where all the quantities are Nc Nc matrices in the clus-ter sites. Since the bare lattice Green 
function is given by G₀(k˜, z) = [(z + µ)  t(k˜)]−¹ and the hopping can
be split into intra- and inter-cluster parts (see Eq. (25)), t(k˜) = tc + δt(k˜), we obtain
G(k˜, z) = [g−¹(z) − δt(k˜)]−¹    (47)
with g−¹(z) = (z + µ)   tc  Σc(z). This form was de-rived in Sec. II.A from the locator expansion 
Eq. (30) by ignoring the hybridization Γ between cluster and host. According to Eq. (46), the CPT 
can be viewed as the ap-proximation that is obtained by replacing the self-energy in the Dyson 
equation of the lattice Green function G by the self-energy of an isolated cluster Σc. This idea 
was first developed by Gros and Valenti (1994) and applied to the 3-band Hubbard model. A different 
approach to derive the CPT was taken by Pairault et al. (1998) (see also Pairault et al., 2000; 
S´en´echal et al., 2002). They showed that Eq. (47) is obtained as the leading order term in a 
strong coupling expansion in the hopping δt between sites on different clusters. This derivation of 
the CPT provided a fundamental theoretical basis to assess the nature of the approximation as well 
as to systemat-ically improve the quality of the approach by including higher order terms in the 
perturbative expansion.

10


The CPT becomes exact in the weak coupling limit U/t = 0 and the strong-coupling limit t/U = 0 as 
well as in the infinite cluster size limit Nc    (S´en´echal et al., 2002). The limit t/U = 0 is 
reproduced exactly since the CPT is the perturbative result in the hopping. In this limit, all the 
sites in the lattice are decoupled, and the system is solved exactly by the single-site Green 
func-tion gc. In the opposite limit U/t = 0, the cluster self-energy Σc in Eq. (46) vanishes and 
G(k˜) = G₀(k˜) is the exact solution.  In the limit Nc    , the clus-ter Green function gc becomes 
the exact Green func-tion of the full system. At finite t/U and cluster size Nc = 1, the CPT 
recovers the Hubbard-I approxima-tion (Hubbard, 1963) where the self-energy is approx-imated by the 
self-energy U ²/4ω (at half-filling) of an isolated atom (Gros and Valenti, 1994; S´en´echal et 
al., 2000, 2002).
According to the derivation of the CPT, the cluster Green function gc is to be calculated on a 
cluster with open boundary conditions. Since the hopping tc between sites inside the cluster is 
treated exactly whereas the inter-cluster hopping δt between surface sites on different clusters is 
treated perturbatively, translational invariance
hopping δt (Dahnken et al., 2002).  However, as dis-cussed by S´en´echal et al. (2002), periodic 
boundary con-ditions lead to less accurate spectra for the 1D Hubbard model than open boundary 
conditions. This a-posteriori argument for open boundary conditions is substantiated by 
calculations within Potthoff’s self-energy functional approach (see Sec. II.H) which show that the 
grand po-tential of the system is only stationary in the limit of open boundary conditions 
(Potthoff et al., 2003).


2. Cellular dynamical mean-field theory

A superior approximation may be obtained if, instead of the isolated cluster Green function g, the 
full lattice Green function G restricted to cluster sites is used to evaluate the functional Φ. 
This approximation can be motivated microscopically by approximating the momen-tum conservation on 
internal vertices in the diagrams defining Φ. Momentum conservation at each vertex is described by 
the Laue function
∆ = Σ eix·(k1+k2+···,−k′ −k′ −···) = Nδ         ,

for sites x˜ in the superlattice. As a result, the cluster     x
1  2

(50)

wave-vector K is not a good quantum number and we
where k₁, k₂ (k′ , k′ ) are the momenta entering (leav-
have as a generalization of the Fourier transform Eq. (24)            ¹  ²

(we omit the frequency dependence for convenience)
ing) the vertex. Mu¨ller-Hartmann (1989b) showed that
the DMFT may be derived by completely ignoring mo-mentum conservation at each internal vertex by 
setting

G(k, k′) =  1  Σ
Σ e−ik·Xi G(X , X , k)eik′·Xj
∆ = 1.  Then one may freely sum over all of the in-

Nc             i  j
Q Xi,Xj
′
ternal momentum labels, and the Green functions in the diagrams are replaced by the local Green 
function

× δ(k − k − Q) .          (48)
Gii = 1/N Σk G(k).

where k and k′ are wave-vectors in the full Brillouin zone
and Q is a wave-vector in the cluster reciprocal space. Here we used the relation G(k˜) = G(k) 
which follows from Eq. (22) by replacing k˜ by k = k˜ + K. To restore
The CDMFT and DCA (see below) techniques may
also be defined by their respective approximations to the Laue function. In the CDMFT the Laue 
function is ap-proximated by

translational invariance in the full lattice Green function,
∆
= Σ eiX·(K1 +k˜1+K2 +k˜2+···−K′ −k˜′ −K′ −k˜′ −···) .

the CPT approximates G(k, k′) by the Q = 0 contribu-tion to obtain
CDMFT
X
1  1  2
2


(51)

GCPT (k) =
 1 
Nc
Xi ,Xj
e−ⁱᵏ·⁽Xi−Xj )G(Xi, Xj, k) ,  (49)
Thus the CDMFT omits the phase factors eⁱᵏ˜·x˜ resulting from the position of the cluster in the 
original lattice, but keeps the phase factors eⁱᵏ˜·X. The latter are directly

as the translational invariant propagator used to calcu-late spectra. With this approximation, the 
CPT provides a very economical method to calculate the lattice Green function of an infinite size 
(N   ) Hubbard-like model from the Green function (or equivalently self-energy) of an isolated 
cluster of finite size Nc  N . From GCPT (k) one can calculate single-particle quantities such as 
pho-toemission spectra, kinetic and potential energies, double occupancy, etc.
To reduce the numerical cost, it was suggested to use
responsible for the violation of translational invariance.
Consequently, all quantities in the CDMFT are functions of two cluster momenta K₁, K₂ or two sites 
X₁, X₂ respectively.
If the CDMFT Laue function Eq. (51) is applied to diagrams in Φ, each Green function leg is 
replaced by the CDMFT coarse-grained Green function (the frequency dependence is dropped for 
notational convenience)
G¯(X₁, X₂) = G(X₁, X₂; x˜ = 0) =

periodic boundary conditions on the CPT cluster by adding the appropriate hopping terms to the 
intra-cluster hopping tc and subtracting them from the inter-cluster
 1 
N 2
K1,K2
k˜1,k˜2
eⁱ⁽K1+k˜1)·X1 G(K , K ; k˜ , k˜
)e−i(K2 +k˜2)·X2 =


N 2 Σ     ˜  ˜



11

and Green function legs in Φ are replaced by the DCA



or in matrix notation for the cluster sites X₁ and X₂
G¯(K, z) = Nc   G(K + k˜, z) ,    (59)
N

G¯ (z) = Nc   G(k˜, z) ,      (53)
N
k˜
k˜

since Green functions can be freely summed over the N/Nc wave-vectors k˜ of the superlattice. 
Similarly, the

since G is diagonal in k˜1, k˜2 due to the translational in-
interactions are replaced by the DCA coarse grained in-teraction

variance of the superlattice. Similarly each interaction
line is replaced by its coarse-grained result
U¯ (K) = Nc   U (K + k˜) .     (60)
N

U¯ =
Nc Σ
k˜
U(k˜) .       (54)
N  k˜                  As with the CDMFT, the effect of coarse-graining the interaction is to 
reduce the effect of non-local interactions

The summations over the cluster sites X within each
diagram remain to be performed. As a consequence of coarse-graining the propagators in Φ, the CDMFT 
self-energy
to within the cluster. This collapse of the diagrams in the Φ functional onto those of an effective 
cluster problem is illustrated in Fig. 4 for a second order contribution.


Σc(z) =
δΦ[G¯ (z), U¯ ]
δG¯ (z)        (55)


is restricted to cluster sites and consequently independent of k˜. Note that by definition, G¯ and 
U¯ are truncated out-side the cluster, i.e. if the interaction U is non-local, U¯
includes only interactions within, but not between clus-
ters.
The CDMFT estimate of the lattice grand potential is obtained by substituting the CDMFT approximate 
gen-
erating functional Φ[G¯ , U¯ ] into Eq. (45). From the con-dition that the grand potential is 
stationary with respect
to the lattice Green function, δΩ/δG = 0, one obtains a relation between the lattice self-energy 
and the cluster self-energy
Σ(K₁, K₂; k˜1, k˜2) =
Σ e−i(K1 +k˜1)·X1 Σ (X , X )ei(K2 +k˜2)·X2 . (56)





Figure 4 A second-order term in the generating functional Φ of the Hubbard model.  The dashed line 
represents the interaction U , and the solid line on the left hand side (right hand side) the 
lattice (coarse-grained) single-particle Green function G (G¯). When the DCA Laue function is used 
to describe momentum conservation at the internal vertices, the
wave-vectors collapse onto those of the cluster and each lattice Green function is replaced by its 
coarse-grained average.

The resulting compact graphs are functionals of the coarse grained Green function G¯(K) and 
interaction

X1 ,X2
c  1  2
U¯ (K), and thus depend on the cluster momenta K only. For example, when Nc = 1, only the local 
part of the

With Eq. (52) the left hand side of Eq. (44) then becomes the coarse-graining relation
¯    Nc     −1 ˜       −1
N    0       c
k˜
interaction survives the coarse graining. As with the CDMFT, within the DCA it is important that 
both the interaction and the Green function are coarse-grained (Hettler et al., 2000). As a 
consequence of the collapse of the Φ-diagrams, the DCA self-energy
δΦ[G¯(K, z), U¯ ]

with the bare Green function G₀(z) = [(z+µ) −t(k˜)]−¹.
Σc(K, z) =
δG¯(K, z)      (61)



3. Dynamical cluster approximation

In the DCA the phase factors eⁱᵏ˜·X are omitted too, so that the DCA approximation to the Laue 
function becomes
∆DCA = NcδK +K +···,K′ +K′ +···    (58)
only depends on the cluster momenta K.
To obtain the DCA estimate of the lattice grand po-tential, we substitute the DCA approximate 
generating
functional Φ[G¯(K), U¯ (K)] into Eq. (45). The grand po-tential is stationary with respect to G 
when
δΩ[G¯(K), U¯ (K)]
δG(k)   = Σc(K) − Σ(k) = 0 ,   (62)

12


which means that Σ(k) = Σc(K) is the proper ap-proximation for the lattice self-energy 
corresponding to Φ[G¯(K), U¯ ]. The self-consistency condition on the left
hand side of Eq. (44) then becomes the coarse-graining relation
G¯(K, z) = Nc Σ[G−¹(K + k˜) − Σ (K, z)]−¹ .  (63)


with the bare Green function G₀(K+ k˜, z) = [z − QK+k˜ + µ]−¹.
Both the CDMFT and the DCA have well defined limits. In the infinite size cluster limit Nc    , the 
CDMFT and DCA approximations to the Laue function recover the exact Laue function, Φ is evaluated 
with the full lattice Green function and interactions and thus the exact result is recovered. When 
Nc = 1, both the Laue functions reduce to ∆ = 1, Φ is evaluated with the local Green function and 
local contributions of the interac-tions, and the DMFT result is recovered.


4. Self-consistency scheme

The two equations (44) form a non-linear set of equa-tions which have to be solved 
self-consistently to deter-mine the cluster self-energy Σc[G¯ ] with the use of a suit-
able cluster solver. For cluster solvers that sum up all diagrams of Σc, i.e. in contrast to a 
skeletal expansion of Σc, an additional step is necessary in the self-consistent cycle. In order to 
not overcount self-energy diagrams, Σc is to be calculated as a functional of the corresponding
bare propagator to G¯ , the cluster excluded Green func-
tion
G(z) = [G¯ −1(z) + Σc(z)]−¹     (64)
This equation¹ unambiguously defines the self-consistent iteration procedure illustrated in Fig. 5:
1. The iteration is started by guessing an initial clus-ter self-energy Σc(z), usually zero or the 
result from second order perturbation theory, to
2. Calculate the coarse grained quantities
G¯ (z) = Nc Σ[G−¹(k˜, z)−Σ (z)]−¹ , U¯ = Nc Σ U(k˜)
4. The self-energy Σc(z) or respectively the cluster Green function Gc(z) is calculated in the 
effective cluster model (see Sec. II.D) by using any of the quantum cluster solvers discussed in 
Sec. III.
5. For techniques that produce the cluster Green func-tion Gc rather than the self-energy, the new 
es-timate of the cluster self-energy is calculated as Σc(z) = G−1(z) − Gc−¹(z).
The iteration closes by re-calculating the coarse-grained Green function G¯ (z) in step (2) with 
the new estimate of the cluster self-energy. This procedure is repeated un-
til the cluster Green function Gc(z) equals the coarse-grained Green function G¯ (z) to within the 
desired accu-racy.















Figure 5 Sketch of the CDMFT and DCA embedded cluster
algorithms. The iteration starts with computing the coarse grained Green function G¯ using an 
initial guess for the cluster
self-energy Σc. The cluster excluded Green function  is then used to define the effective cluster 
problem which yields a new estimate of Σc.



C. Discussion

In contrast to the DMFT, a unique setup for the em-bedded cluster theory does not exist. Depending 
on the treatment of e.g.  boundary conditions (see Sec. II.A and Biroli and Kotliar, 2002) 
differences in the coupling of the cluster to its environment arise (see comparison

N    0       c
k˜
N        in Sec. II.C.4 below).  In fact, there exist infinitely
k˜      many realizations of embedded cluster theories for any given model Hamiltonian (Biroli and 
Kotliar, 2002;

3. The effective cluster problem is then set up with the cluster excluded Green function G(z) and 
U¯ .



¹ A unifying matrix notation is used.  In the CDMFT, the quantities are matrices in the Nc cluster 
sites and in partic-
ular [G−¹(k˜, z)]X X = (z + µ)δX X − [t(k˜)]X X . For the
Okamoto et al., 2003; Potthoff, 2003b; Potthoff et al., 2003), two of which we focus on in this 
review.
The fundamental approximation common to all ap-proaches is that they try to go beyond conven-tional 
mean-field approximations and introduce non-local physics by replacing the unsolvable lattice 
Hamiltonian by some manageable finite portion – possibly with ef-

0     i j
i j      i j
fective model parameters – and reintroduce the thermo-
DCA, the matrices are diagonal in the cluster momenta K and

[G−¹(k˜, z)]KK = z + µ − Q
K+k˜.
dynamic limit by a mean-field type treatment of the re-

13


maining system. Thus, the influence of truly long-ranged correlations, i.e. those beyond the 
cluster size, is still not incorporated, but short-ranged correlations and in par-ticular the local 
dynamics with respect to the cluster can ideally be treated exactly.  That this can already lead to 
substantial renormalizations has been demonstrated in Sec. I.B and is also well-known from the 
DMFT. The combination of short- to medium-ranged correlations with mean-field treatment of 
long-ranged physics enables the investigation of a system’s tendency to certain types of order not 
accessible by conventional mean-field theory. One can thus more clearly identify the possible 
existence of long-ranged correlations which are normally hard to establish in conventional 
finite-system calculations. On the other hand, it is this mean-field likeness that prac-tically 
disables a proof for the appearance of a phase transition in the real model, even though the 
behavior of transition temperatures etc. with cluster size can give valuable hints about the system 
(see Sec. I.B).


1. Conservation and thermodynamic consistency

Both the DCA and CDMFT approximations are self-consistent and are Φ-derivable since they satisfy 
Eq. (44). Thus, they are thermodynamically consistent in the Baym-Kadanoff sense. Observables 
calculated from the lattice Green function G agree with those calculated as derivatives of the 
lattice grand potential Ω. Since the CPT is not self-consistent, it is not thermodynamically 
consistent. However, none of these approaches is con-serving in the Baym-Kadanoff sense since they 
all vio-late momentum conservation. Thus, each of these ap-proaches is likely to violate some set 
of the Ward identi-ties (Hettler et al., 2000).


2. Causality

One problem in any formation of an embedded cluster theory is the manifestation of causality, i.e. 
a physical Green function cannot have poles anywhere except on the real axis. In particular, for 
the fundamental quantity of the theory, the single particle Green function, this means that the 
proper self-energy in momentum space has to obey  mΣ(k, ω + i0⁺) < 0. Early attempts to formu-late 
cluster extensions to DMFT (Schiller and Ingersent, 1995) ran into exactly this problem, which e.g. 
mani-fests itself in negative single-particle spectral functions. Explicit proofs for causality can 
be given for the DCA (Hettler et al., 2000) and the CDMFT (Kotliar et al., 2001; see also Biroli et 
al., 2003). More precisely, any embedded cluster theory consistent with the locator ex-pansion (or 
a suitably defined cavity construction) obeys, due to Eqs. (28) and (32), causality. A closer look 
at Eqs.
(28) and (32) also reveals how problems can arise. It is,
for example, tempting to replace the well defined cluster quantity Σc(z) in (28) by some 
approximation to Σ(z),
i.e. the full self-energy. As has been discussed in some de-tail by Okamoto et al. (2003) (see also 
Sec. II.H.2), such a procedure will in general introduce ringing phenomena and lead to acausal 
behavior. How strongly such a viola-tion of causality will eventually influence the interesting 
low-energy results is quite likely a question of the model parameters under investigation. In any 
case, it must be taken as serious reason to at least doubt the quantitative accuracy of such 
results.


3. Reducible and irreducible quantities

Fundamental quantities like the one-particle self-energy Σ(z), or its many-particle counterparts 
entering
e.g. susceptibilities, carry the whole fragile information about the many-body physics of a given 
model. In the language of diagrammatic perturbation theory they are built of so-called irreducible 
diagrams.  Hence they are also frequently called irreducible quantities; in contrast, the 
single-particle Green function or a susceptibility is a reducible quantity.  It is an important 
aspect, that the cluster theories discussed use approximants for these ir-reducible quantities 
only, i.e. the quantities obtained as derivatives of the Baym-Kadanoff Φ functional. In fact, in 
the formulation in Sec. II.B any attempt to replace reducible quantities like the one-particle 
Green function directly by approximants is at least dangerous.
To see this, consider the grand potential functional Eq. (45).  It is expressed as a sum over all 
closed connected distinct graphs constructed from the Green function G and interaction U. The 
subset of compact graphs comprise the Baym-Kadanoff generating func-tional Φ[G, U] which is 
expressed as a skeletal graph sum over all distinct compact closed connected graphs. Compact 
diagrams have no internal parts representing corrections to the Green function G.










Figure 6 Non-compact (left) and compact (right) non-local corrections to the grand potential. Here 
the upper (lower) circle is meant to represent a set of graphs which are closed except for the 
external lines shown, and restricted to site n (the origin).

In quantum cluster theories the graphs for Φ are approximated by their cluster counterparts.  As an 
example, consider the limit of infinite dimensions, used by Metzner and Vollhardt to derive the 
DMFT (Metzner and Vollhardt, 1989). In this limit most closed

14


connected graphs are local since the Green function falls off quickly with distance r, G(r)  D−ʳ/². 
In fact, only a small set of graphs, corresponding to non-compact cor-rections, remain finite. To 
see this, consider the simplest non-local corrections to non-compact and compact parts of the grand 
potential of a Hubbard-like model, illus-trated in Fig. 6. Here the upper (lower) circle is a set 
of graphs composed of intra-site propagators restricted to site n (the origin). Consider all such 
non-local corrections on the shell of sites which are n mutually orthogonal unit translations from 
the origin. In the limit of high dimen-sions, there are 2ⁿD!/((D  n)!n!)   (Dⁿ) such sites. Since 
as D   , G(r)  D−ʳ/²(Metzner and Vollhardt, 1989), the legs on the compact correction contribute a 
factor  (D−²ⁿ) whereas those on the non-compact cor-rection contribute  (D−ⁿ). Therefore the 
compact non-local correction falls as D−ⁿ and vanishes as D    ; whereas, the non-compact 
correction remains of order one, regardless of how far site n is from the origin. As a result, the 
generating functional, which is composed of only compact graphs, is a functional of the local Green
Maier et al. (2002b), Biroli and Kotliar (2002) and Biroli et al. (2003). Both approximations share 
the un-derlying idea and general algorithm, and differ only in the form used for the hopping matrix 
t (see Eq. (35)). The purpose of this section is to convey the consequences of this, at first 
sight, small difference on the effective clus-ter problem, convergence properties and the 
calculation of the lattice self-energy.


a. Nature of effective cluster problem.  For notational con-venience, we use a 1D model with 
nearest neighbor hop-ping t only, set the on-site energy Qₒ = 0 and denote the cluster size by Lc. 
The generalization to higher dimen-sion or longer-ranged hopping terms is straightforward.
The CDMFT uses the original form for the hopping matrix t(k˜) which is obtained e.g. as an 
inter-cluster Fourier transform (see Eq. (22)) of t(x˜).Only entries be-tween neighboring sites 
inside the cluster [t(k˜)]Xi,Xi±1 =
−t and between neighboring sites on the surface of the

function and interaction in this limit
cluster [t(k˜)]
Xi,Xi±(Lc−1)
= −te∓ⁱᵏ˜Lc are finite. The for-

Φ[G, U] = Φ[Gii, Uii] + O(1/D) .    (65)
A similar analysis was done for the DCA cluster problem by Aryanpour et al. (2002). They find that 
the correc-tions from sites outside the cluster associated with com-pact diagrams are quite small 
(i.e. high order in the linear cluster size 1/Lc) justifying the approximation
Φ[G, U] ≈ Φ[G¯(K), U¯ (K)] ,     (66)
while those associated with non-compact diagrams are large and cannot be neglected. The same 
analysis may be done for the CDMFT, simply by replacing the DCA graphs by those for the CDMFT.
Thus, the essential approximation for the DMFT, the
mer entries form the intra-cluster hopping matrix tc = Nc/N  k˜ t(k˜) while the latter entries form 
the inter-cluster hopping matrix δt(k˜) = t(k˜)  tc. Both ampli-
tudes are given by the original hopping t. For the effec-
tive cluster problem this translates to the fact that only sites on the surface of the cluster 
couple to the effective medium, while sites inside the cluster only couple to their neighboring 
sites in the cluster. Hence the cluster prob-lem has open boundary conditions and translational 
in-variance is violated within the cluster. The lattice Green
function G(k˜) (see Eq. (30)) is a matrix in the cluster
sites and cannot be diagonalized by going over to cluster K-space. Therefore the coarse-graining 
step Eq. (31) is done in real space.
The DCA restores translational invariance by setting

DCA and the CDMFT is to approximate the lattice gen-
[tDCA(k˜)]X X = [t(k˜)]X X e−ⁱᵏ˜·(Xi−Xj ) (see Eq. (35)).
i j       i j

erating functional Φ by its cluster counterpart in the
estimate of the lattice grand potential, Eq. (45). Con-committantly the derivatives of Φ, i.e. the 
lattice self-energy and vertex functions are approximated by their respective cluster counterparts. 
This once more under-lines why in embedded cluster theories it is necessary to
As a consequence, its matrix elements become identi-cal and are given by −te∓ⁱᵏ˜ between sites Xj = 
Xi ∓ 1 and Xj = Xi ± (Lc − 1). Hence the DCA hopping ma-
trix tDCA(k˜) is fully cyclic with respect to the cluster
sites and the lattice Green function G(k˜) is diagonal-ized by going over to cluster K-space. The 
DCA intra-

always work with the cluster irreducible quantities; they
are the only quantities compatible with the cluster and any attempt to include more information by 
e.g. Fourier transformation will lead to consistency problems, which
cluster hopping matrix tc,DCA = Nc/N  k˜
also cyclic with finite matrix-elements
tDCA
(k˜) is

eventually express themselves as causality violation. Irre-ducible quantities are also those 
important to discuss the convergence behavior of a cluster method with increasing
[tc,DCA]Xi,Xj
Lc   π
= −t π sin L
(67)

cluster size as discussed in the next section.


4. Comparison

Detailed comparisons of the DCA and CDMFT al-gorithms were presented in Maier and Jarrell (2002),
between sites Xj = Xi  1 and Xj = Xi  (Lc  1) and the DCA cluster problem therefore has periodic 
bound-ary conditions. At finite cluster size Lc, the intra-cluster hopping is reduced by the factor 
1/6(π/Lc)²+ ((π/Lc)⁴) compared to its lattice counterpart t. In the infinite clus-ter size limit it 
becomes t. This reduction in the intra-cluster coupling is compensated by the inter-cluster hop-

15


ping which is of long-ranged nature,
sin[(x˜ ∓ 1)π/Lc]

sin(π/Lc)
since each of the Nc terms contributes a term of the order
O(1/Lc ).

[δtDCA(x˜)]Xi Xj = −t[
(x˜ ∓ 1)π/Lc  −
π/Lc
δx˜,0]
(68)
It can further be shown that Γ acts as the small pa-
rameter in these theories: The approximation performed by the DCA and the CDMFT is to replace the 
lattice

between sites Xj = Xi  1 and Xj = Xi  (Lc  1). It is
important to note that δtDCA couples all the sites in the cluster to sites in the effective medium. 
It vanishes for x˜ = 0 and decreases as 1/x˜ with increasing x˜. We also notice that
δtDCA ∼ 1/Lc         (69)
for large linear cluster sizes Lc and emphasize that this result holds generally in any dimension 
D.
The restoration of translational invariance in the DCA
is achieved by mapping the lattice onto a cluster with periodic boundary conditions with reduced 
hopping in-
Green function G by its coarse-grained quantity G¯ in di-
agrams for the generating functional Φ (see Sec. II.B). Both Green functions differ by the 
inter-cluster hop-ping δt(k˜), the self-energy and the hybridization func-tion Γ. Since the 
diagrams in Φ are summed over k˜, the terms having the same order as δt(k˜) vanish since Nc/N  k˜ 
δt(k˜) = 0. If we assume that the self-energy has corrections of the same or higher order in 1/Lc 
as Γ, the convergence of Φ is entirely determined by Γ. With the scaling relations (70) and (71) we 
find for the CDMFT that ΦCDMF T ≈ Φ + O(1/Lc) while the DCA

tegrals t
c,DCA
and coupling every site in the cluster to
converges like ΦDCA ≈ Φ + O(1/L²). Since Σ = δΦ/δG,

a neighboring site in the effective medium through long-ranged hopping integrals δtDCA(x˜). The sum 
of all fi-nite intra- and inter-cluster couplings for a given site is again given by the original 
value t. Similar conclusions about the nature of the effective CDMFT and DCA clus-ter problems were 
reached in a study of the large U limit of the Falicov-Kimball model (FKM, see Eq. (182)), i.e. the 
classical Ising model (Biroli et al., 2003).
We stress that clusters with linear size Lc = 2 are special.  Here both terms in the intra-cluster 
hop-ping Eq. (67) give a contribution to the same matrix-element. Hence the nearest-neighbor 
hopping is given by 2t (Lc/π) sin (π/Lc), i.e. with the prefactor  2t instead of  t for larger 
clusters. This reflects the fact that every site sees its nearest neighbor twice due to the 
periodic boundary conditions. Non-local fluctuations are thus en-hanced in clusters with linear 
size Lc = 2 as seen e.g. in an over-proportional suppression of transition tempera-
tures (see Secs. IV.B and IV.D.2).

b. Convergence with cluster size.  The differences in boundary conditions translate directly to 
different asymptotic behaviors for large cluster sizes Nc. In lead-ing order the hybridization with 
the mean-field, Γ van-ishes like δt² as the cluster size increases (see Eqs. (33) and (43)). In the 
CDMFT the magnitude of δt is of or-der one for the sites on the surface of the cluster and zero 
otherwise. The average hybridization per cluster site in the CDMFT thus scales like
it converges with Lc as the corresponding Φ confirming
the assumption. The generating functional Φ and hence the grand potential thus converges faster in 
the DCA than in the CDMFT with increasing cluster size.


c. Numerical comparison. The scaling behavior Eqs. (70) and (71) of the CDMFT and DCA average 
hybridiza-tion strengths was verified numerically in the 1D FKM in Maier and Jarrell (2002) (see 
also Maier et al., 2002b). Here we review the effects of the different scaling behav-iors of the 
average hybridization on the phase transition in this model. The Hamiltonian of the FKM is 
discussed in Sec. IV.B, Eq. (182). It can be considered as a sim-plified Hubbard model with only 
one spin-species being allowed to hop. However it still shows a complex phase diagram including a 
Mott gap for large U at half fill-ing, an Ising-like charge ordering with the corresponding 
transition temperature Tc being zero in 1D, and phase separation in all dimensions. Since the 1D 
FKM is in the 1D Ising universality class we expect similar scaling be-havior as observed in the 
results for the 1D Ising model in Sec. I.B. In particular, we expect finite transition 
tem-peratures within both cluster approximations due to their residual mean-field character. The 
CDMFT and DCA ef-fective cluster models were solved with a QMC approach described in Hettler et al. 
(2000).
The DCA transition temperature Tc was determined from the divergence of the lattice charge 
susceptibility χ(Q) calculated from the particle-hole correlation func-

  
Γ¯    =  Tr [Γ
 1 
] ∼ O(  ) ,  (70)
tion as detailed in Sec. II.F. In the CDMFT formal-

CDMFT  Nc
CDMFT    Lc
ism the calculation of lattice susceptibilities is difficult if
not impossible due to the lack of translational invariance.

where the trace runs over cluster sites and frequency.
This behavior is evident since only the 2D(LD−¹) sites on the surface contribute to the sum and Nc 
= LD. In the DCA, δt =  (1/Lc) (see Eq. (69)). The average hybridization of the DCA cluster to the 
effective medium hence scales faster to zero as
Here Tc is determined from the calculation of the charge order parameter m as detailed in Sec. 
II.E. For the DCA both techniques are illustrated in the inset to Fig. 7.
As for the 1D Ising model (see Fig. 2 in Sec. I.B), the DCA result for Tc scales to zero almost 
linearly in 1/Nc for large Nc. Moreover, Tc obtained from DCA is smaller

  
Γ¯   =  Tr [Γ
 1 
] ∼ O(  )    (71)
and thus closer to the exact result than the Tc obtained

DCA  Nc
DCA     2
c
from CDMFT. The CDMFT does not show any scaling

16




0.03



0.02



0.01

U=W=1









0.4


0.2


DCA MCA





DCA: U=W=1, Nc=4 Tc=0.028



m(T)
χ(Q,T)⁻¹









0.4


0.2
pears in the calculation on the lattice self-energy. The DCA approximates the lattice self-energy 
by a constant within a DCA cell in momentum space, Σ(K + k˜, z) =
Σc(K, z). Therefore the self-energy is a step function in k-space. In order to obtain smooth 
non-local quan-tities such as the Fermi surface or the band structure, an interpolated Σ(k, z) may 
be used. Bilinear interpo-lation in 2D is guaranteed to preserve the sign of the function however 
leads to kinks in Σ(k, z). Yielding the smoothest possible interpolation of Σ(K, z), the use of an

00    0.05    0.1     0
T
0
0     0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5
1/Nc
Figure 7 Transition temperature versus inverse cluster size calculated with DCA/QMC (circles) and 
CDMFT/QMC (squares) when U = W = 4t = 1. Inset: DCA order pa-rameter m(T ) and inverse charge 
susceptibility χ(Q)−¹ versus
temperature. Taken from Maier et al. (2002b).
Akima spline which does not overshoot is consistent with the DCA assumption that the self-energy is 
a smoothly varying function in k-space. However it is important to note that this interpolated 
self-energy should not be used in the self-consistent loop as this can lead to violations of 
causality as discussed above.
In the CDMFT, the lattice self-energy is given by the Fourier transform of the cluster self-energy 
(see Eq. (56))

Σ(k, k′, z) =  1  Σ Σ


e−ik·Xi Σ (X , X , z)eik′·Xj

behavior and in fact seems to tend to a finite value for Tc
as Nc    . As explained above, this striking difference can be attributed to the different boundary 
conditions. The open boundary conditions of the CDMFT cluster
× δ(k − k − Q) .          (72)
Since the CDMFT cluster violates translational invari-ance, the lattice self-energy depends on two 
momenta k

result in a large surface contribution so that Γ¯
CDMFT >
and k′ which can differ by a wave-vector Q of the clus-

Γ¯DCA. This engenders pronounced mean-field behavior
that stabilizes the finite temperature transition for the cluster sizes treated in Fig. 7. For 
larger cluster sizes the
ter reciprocal space. To restore translational invariance,
the CDMFT approximates the lattice self-energy by the Q = 0 contribution to give (Kotliar et al., 
2001)

bulk contribution to the CDMFT grand potential should


 1 
Σ(k, z) =
Σ e−ⁱᵏ·⁽Xi−Xj )Σ (X , X , z) .  (73)



finite size systems.  In general, systems with open
boundary conditions are expected to have a surface contribution in the grand potential of order 
O(1/L )
In real space, the lattice self-energy
 1  ΣΣ(x , x , z) =     Σ (X , X )δ



(74)

tems with periodic boundary conditions. As a result,
simulations of finite size systems with periodic boundary conditions converge much more quickly 
than those with open boundary conditions (Landau, 1976).
The DCA converges faster than the CDMFT for criti-cal properties as well as extended cluster 
quantities due to the different boundary conditions and the coupling to the mean-field. As detailed 
above, each site in the DCA cluster experiences the same coupling to the effec-tive medium, while 
in the CDMFT only the sites on the boundary of the cluster couple to the mean-field host. Provided 
that the system is far from a transition, the sites in the center of the CDMFT cluster couple to 
the mean-field only through propagators which fall exponen-tially with distance. Local results such 
as the single-particle density of states thus converge more quickly in the CDMFT when measured on a 
central site (see Maier et al., 2002b).


d. Calculation of the lattice self-energy. Another signifi-cant difference between the two cluster 
techniques ap-
is thus obtained by averaging over those cluster self-energy elements Σ(Xi, Xj) where the distance 
Xi Xj equals the distance xi  xj.  As explained in Biroli and Kotliar (2002), the factor 1/Nc leads 
to an underestimation of non-local self-energy contributions at small cluster sizes, since the 
number of contributions for fixed xi  xj > 0 in the sum Eq. (74) is always smaller than Nc. As a 
possible solution to this problem, Biroli and Kotliar (2002) suggested to replace the form
(74) for the lattice self-energy by a weighted sum which preserves causality. One could e.g. weight 
the terms in the sum by their number instead of Nc to achieve better results.
It is important to note that as in the DCA, the lat-tice self-energy Eq. (73) or (74) does not 
enter the self-consistent loop. Biroli et al. (2003) however realized that a translational 
invariant formulation of the CDMFT algo-rithm can be obtained by replacing the cluster self-energy 
Σc(z) by the translationally invariant lattice self-energy Σ(k˜), Eq. (73) in the coarse-graining 
step Eq. (53). De-spite the dependence on k˜, this form of Σ(k˜) can be shown to preserve causality 
(Biroli et al., 2003).

17


D. Effective cluster model

Quantum cluster approaches reduce the complexity of the lattice problem with infinite degrees of 
freedom to a (numerically) solvable system with Nc degrees of free-dom. As detailed in Sec. II.B 
this is achieved through the approximation of Φ[G, U], the exact Baym-Kadanoff
functional of the exact Green function G and interaction U, by a spatially localized quantity Φ[G¯ 
, U¯ ] which is a functional by the corresponding (coarse-grained) quanti-
Hc,₀, it is convenient to use Eq. (32) for the CDMFT or respectively (42) for the DCA together with 
Eq. (76) to represent the cluster excluded Green function  . In the CDMFT, we have with Eq. (28)
G(z) = [(z + µ) − tc − Γ(z)]  ,    (78)
and the matrix-elements of the intra-cluster hopping tc are given by the hopping amplitudes of the 
original lat-
tice, tij as detailed in Sec. II.C.4. The non-interacting

ties restricted to the cluster sites, G¯
and U¯ = Nc/N Σk˜ U(k˜).
= Nc/N Σk˜ G(k˜)
problem is thus split into two parts, cluster degrees of
freedom with hopping integrals tij and their coupling to

Φ[G¯ , U¯ ] may be calculated non-perturbatively as the solution of a quantum cluster model
a dynamic host described by the hybridization function
Γ(z). The CDMFT cluster model can hence be written as (see also Bolech et al., 2003)

Hc = Hc,₀ + Hc,I . (75)
Hc consists of a non-interacting term Hc,₀ describing the

Hc = Hc,0 + Hc,I =
Σij,σ

(tij − µδij)c† c

bare cluster degrees of freedom and their coupling to a host. The interacting term Hc,I is related 
to the corre-
sponding term in the original lattice model through the
+   λijk˜
ij,k˜,σ
[a†
ikσ
ajk˜σ
+ h.c.]

coarse-grained interaction U¯ . This ensures that the func-
tional dependencies of the cluster functional Φc and its lattice counterpart Φ are identical.
+   [Vij
ij,k˜,σ
(k˜)c† a ˜
+ h.c.]

The non-interacting term H  is fixed by the require-
Σ U¯ij † †
equals the coarse-grained Green function G¯ of the origi-
nal model                           The first part describes the isolated cluster degrees of 
freedom with fermionic creation (destruction) operators

Gc ≡ G¯ = [G−1 − Σc]−¹ ,      (76)
†
iσ  iσ
). The second term simulates the host degrees

and hence is specified by the cluster-excluded Green func-
of freedom as a non-interacting conduction band with

tion G (see Eq. (64)).
the help of auxiliary operators a†
ikσ
(aik˜σ
) and energy

For Green function or respectively action based cluster solvers, like e.g. perturbation theory or 
QMC, Hc,₀ can hence be encoded in the cluster-excluded Green function
. The corresponding cluster action Sc for the fermionic cluster degrees of freedom represented by 
the Grassman variables γ, γ∗ reads in imaginary time and cluster real space
levels λijk˜. The coupling between the cluster states and
the bath with an amplitude Vij (k˜) is described by the third term and the interacting term is 
given by the last
term. The sums over k˜ run over the N/Nc wave-vectors of the superlattice. Integrating out the 
auxiliary degrees
of freedom yields an action of the form (77) with
Gij (z) = [(z + µ) − tc − Γc(z)]ij     (80)

∫  ∫  Σ
Σ ∗ ˜
˜ −1   ˜

c                 iσ
0   0   ij,σ
β
ij,σ     jσ
lm,k˜

+ ∫ dτ
Σ U¯

ⁱʲ γ∗ (τ )γ∗

(τ )γ

(τ )γ

(τ ) ,   (77)
Self-consistency then requires that the auxiliary param-
eters λijk and Vij(k˜) are chosen in a way such that the

2 iσ
0  ij,σσ′
jσ′
jσ′   iσ
cluster hybridization function Γc(z) is identical to its lat-tice counterpart Γ(z) defined in Eq. 
(78). It is important

where we used the short hand notation i, j for the cluster sites Xi, Xj . Note that for the CDMFT 
the quantities ij and U¯ij are given by Eqs. (64) and (54) respectively,
while for the DCA they are given by the cluster Fourier transforms of  (K) = [G¯−1(K, z) + Σc(K, 
z)]−¹ and re-spectively of U¯ (K) (see Eq. (60)).
For Hamiltonian-based techniques, like e.g. the non-crossing approximation, exact diagonalization 
or numer-ical renormalization group, the need for an explicit for-mulation of Hc,₀ is inevitable. 
To setup the bare part
to note that, while the isolated cluster parameter tc can be deduced directly from the 
non-interacting part of the lattice system, the energy levels λk and coupling con-stants Vij (k) of 
the auxiliary particles are not known a-priori, but determined by the self-consistency condi-tion 
Γc = Γ. Since Γij is only finite on the surface of the cluster (see discussion in Sec. II.C.4), the 
coupling Vij (k˜) between the cluster and the host is only finite for sites i on the surface of the 
cluster which effectively re-duces the number of baths. This was numerically verified

18


in CDMFT exact diagonalization studies by Bolech et al.
(2003).
For the DCA we have with Eqs. (41) and (42)
G(K, z) = [z − Q¯K + µ − Γ(K, z)]  ,   (82)
and hence the DCA effective cluster model is best repre-sented in cluster K-space as
Hc = Hc,0 + Hc,I
ordered phases can be identified by the computation of response functions.  However, to explore the 
nature as well as possible coexistence of symmetry-broken states, generalizations of the cluster 
algorithms that explicitly account for the possibility of symmetry-breaking on the single-particle 
level are necessary.
The applicability and modifications required to treat symmetry broken phases depend on the cluster 
approach. The CPT formalism is not amenable to the description of ordered phases because its 
self-energy is that of a

=  (Q¯K
K,σ
− µ)cKσ
cKσ
+  λk
k,σ
†
kσ kσ
finite isolated cluster in which spontaneous symmetry breaking cannot occur. However, Dahnken et 
al. devel-

+   [VK
K,k˜,σ
(k˜)c†
aK+k˜σ
+ h.c.]
oped a variational extension of the CPT (Dahnken et al., 2003) based on the self-energy functional 
approach by Potthoff (2003b) which yields a self-consistent scheme to

+ Σ Σ U¯ (Q) c†   c†
c  c  . (83)
study ordered phases (for details see Sec. II.H).  The

K,K′ σσ′
Q
2Nc
K+Qσ
K′ −Qσ′
K′ σ′ Kσ
CDMFT formalism can describe ordered phases which
are identifiable by a broken translational symmetry (such as antiferromagnetism) by construction, 
since the trans-

The operators c†  (c  ) create (destroy) an electron with momentum K and spin σ on the cluster. U¯ 
(Q) is
the Coulomb repulsion between electrons on the cluster defined in Eq. (60) and the sum over k˜ in 
the coupling
term again is restricted to the N/Nc wave-vectors of the superlattice. Analogous to the CDMFT case 
it is easy to see that the DCA cluster model yields an action of the form (77) (in cluster Fourier 
space) with a  of the form
(82) and the cluster hybridization function
lational symmetry of the CDMFT cluster is already broken (see Biroli et al., 2003; Maier and 
Jarrell, 2002; Maier et al., 2002b). Hence translational invariant solu-tions are often found to be 
unstable against the ordered one (Biroli et al., 2003). The DCA formalism is trans-lationally 
invariant by construction, and therefore gen-eralizations of the algorithm are necessary to treat 
or-dered phases. To keep this section concise, we exemplify the necessary generalizations of the 
DCA formalism to a selection of relevant types of symmetry-broken phases

Nc
Γc(K, z) = N
k˜
|VK(k˜)|2
z − λK+k˜
.    (84)
along with the mapping onto the corresponding cluster models. The adoption of the presented 
concepts to the CDMFT approach is straightforward.

The auxiliary parameters of the DCA cluster model are then determined by the condition Γc(K) = 
Γ(K).
For Nc = 1 both the CDMFT and the DCA cluster models reduce to the single-impurity Anderson model. 
If self-consistency is also established on the two-particle level (see discussion at the end of 
Sec. II.A) via a sus-ceptibility, an additional coupling to a bosonic field rep-resenting the 
corresponding fluctuations has to be con-sidered in the cluster model (for details see Maier, 
2003). For Nc = 1 the cluster model then reduces to the ef-fective impurity model used in the EDMFT 
approach (Smith and Si, 2000).
As detailed in Sec. II.A, the CPT formalism sets the hybridization function Γ to zero, i.e 
considers an isolated cluster without the coupling to a host. Thus the CPT cluster model is 
identical to the original lattice model restricted to cluster sites, i.e. given by the first and 
last terms of the CDMFT cluster model Eq. (79).

E. Phases with broken symmetry

For simplicity, in the preceding sections the self-consistent equations of quantum cluster theories 
have been derived assuming the absence of symmetry-breaking. In Sec. II.F we review how 
instabilities to
Once the equations are generalized to account for sym-metry breaking, the requisite algorithmic 
changes are rel-atively simple. A finite conjugate external field is used to initialize the 
calculation and break the symmetry. The field is then switched off after a few iterations and the 
system relaxes to its equilibrium state in the absence of external fields. On the other hand, if 
the field remains small and finite, the dependence of the order parameter on the field can be 
determined and used as an alternate way to calculate the susceptibility (by extrapolation to zero 
field). This approach is especially useful for clus-ter solvers such as the non-crossing 
approximation or the fluctuation-exchange approximation where the computa-tion of two-particle 
correlation functions is numerically too expensive.


1. Uniform magnetic field – Ferromagnetism

We first consider the formalism necessary to treat fer-romagnetism. A finite homogeneous external 
magnetic field h is introduced which acts on the spin σ of the fermions according to the Zeeman 
term

− h   σc† c  .        (85)
i,σ

19


The effect of h on the motion of the spatial degree of freedom of the electrons, i.e. the 
diamagnetic term, is neglected for simplicity².
In the presence of finite h or a uniform magnetization, the single-particle Green functions for up- 
and down-electrons are not equivalent. To account for this SU (2) symmetry-breaking, the spin-index 
of the Green function Gσ, self-energy Σσ and effective medium σ (and hence Γσ) in the derivation of 
the DCA-equations has to be re-tained. For a finite uniform magnetic field h the DCA lattice Green 
function reads
1
phases with coexisting superconducting and antiferro-magnetic order.  The extension to an 
integrated for-malism is straightforward and has been discussed in Lichtenstein and Katsnelson 
(2000).
We consider superconducting phases where the elec-trons are paired in spin singlet or triplet 
states with Sz = 0 indicated by finite values of the order param-eter ∆k := ck†c−k↓ for some k. In 
addition to the normal Green function G(k, τ ) it is therefore necessary to introduce the anomalous 
Green function F (k, τ ) =
Tτ ck†(τ )c−k↓ . The spatial and temporal symmetry of the pairing state can then be inferred from 
the sym-

Gσ(k, z) = z − Q
K+k˜
+ µ + hσ − Σ
c,σ
(86)
(K, z)
metries of F . Since F describes the pairing of fermions, it necessarily is antisymmetric under the 
exchange of two

and the coarse grained and corresponding cluster-
excluded Green function
¯       Nc        ˜
σ       N    σ
k˜
Gσ (K, z) = Gσ (K, z) + Σc,σ(K, z)   (88)
become spin-dependent.
The action of the effective cluster model is identical to the action in the paramagnetic state, Eq. 
(77), but the spin indices have to be explicitly retained. It then describes electrons in an 
external magnetic field h cou-pled to a spin-dependent host and self-consistency is es-tablished by 
equating the Green function of the cluster model with the coarse-grained Green function (87).
In analogy, for Hamiltonian based cluster solvers, an additional term
particles.  The spatial symmetry of the pairing state is determined by the k-dependence of the 
anomalous Green function F (k, τ ). If we assume conventional even-frequency pairing F (k,  τ ) = F 
(k, τ ), in the case of spin-singlet pairing, F has to be symmetric in k, i.e. F ( k, τ ) = F (k, τ 
) as is the case for even parity or-der parameters such as e.g. s-wave and d-wave. In the case of 
spin-triplet pairing F is antisymmetric in k. i.e. F ( k, τ ) =  F (k, τ ) as e.g. in a p-wave 
state.
The allowed symmetry of the pairing state is re-stricted by the cluster geometry. It depends upon 
the k-dependence of the dispersion Qk and the K-dependence of the cluster self-energy Σ(K, τ ). 
When Nc = 1, Σ is local and the k-dependence of F (k, τ ) is entirely through Qk. Hence only 
pairing states with the symmetry of the lat-tice such as s-wave and extended s-wave can be 
described

†
Kσ
K,σ
cKσ
(89)
by this formalism (Jarrell, 1992; Jarrell and Pruschke,
1993). Larger cluster sizes are necessary to describe order-parameters with a symmetry less than 
the lattice

is added to the cluster Hamiltonian, Eq. (83), in the pres-ence of a finite external magnetic field 
h. The coarse-
grained Green function G¯, Eq. (86), is then used to cal-culate the magnetization m := 1/N Σiσ 
σ⟨niσ⟩ according
symmetry, e.g. simulations with Nc = 4 are necessary to describe phases with a dₓ2−y2 -wave order 
parameter which transforms according to cos kₓ  cos ky.
By utilizing the concept of Nambu-spinors

 1  Σ ¯
 
k    k†          k


and after analytical continuation               matrix in Nambu space


m = −
1 1  Σ σ
+∞
dωf (ω)ℑmG¯σ(K, ω + iδ) .  (91)

G(k, z) := ⟨⟨Ψ ; Ψ† ⟩⟩z =
G(k, z)   F (k, z)
F ∗(k, z∗) −G∗(−k, −z∗)

π Nc
−∞


2. Superconductivity

In this and the next section we generalize the DCA formalism to treat phases with superconducting 
and an-tiferromagnetic order, respectively.  For better read-ability, we refrain from discussing 
the description of
(93)
contains information about both the normal and anoma-lous Green functions. In the presence of an 
external pair-ing field η(k) = η′(k) + iη′′(k) which couples to c−k↓ck†, the non-interacting part 
of the Hubbard Hamiltonian can
†
0    k    k 3      1      2
so the the DCA lattice Green function in the supercon-
ducting state becomes
G(k, z) = [zσₒ − (Qk − µ)σ₃
−η (k)σ₁ − η (k)σ₂ − Σc(K, z)]  , (94)

2 In 2D systems the magnetic field can be applied parallel to the
where k = K + k˜
and σi are the Pauli-spin matrices.

plane to avoid orbital effects.
The diagonal parts of the Nambu-matrix Σc(K, z) de-

20


scribe quasiparticle renormalizations and the off-diagonal parts contain information about the K- 
and frequency de-pendence of the pairing state. Again, the coarse-grained Green function
G¯ (K, z) = Nc   G(K + k, z)
N
k˜
3. Antiferromagnetic order

In this section we derive the DCA cluster formalism for antiferromagnetism on a bipartite lattice. 
This formalism is appropriate when Nc > 1. A formalism suitable for the case when Nc = 1 is 
discussed in detail in Georges et al.
(1996) in the context of DMFT.

G¯(K, z)
=
F¯(K, z)

  (95)
The antiferromagnetically ordered state is character-

F¯∗(K, z∗) −G¯∗(−K, −z∗)
is used to calculate the cluster-excluded Green function
G(K, z) = [G¯ −1(K, z) + Σc(K, z)]−¹   (96)
which together with the coarse-grained interaction U¯ (K) defines the action of the corresponding 
effective cluster model
ized by a spatial variation of the magnetization according
to
m(x) = meⁱQ·ˣ ,       (101)
where x denotes the sites in the lattice and Q is the antiferromagnetic wave-vector (Q = (π, π) in 
2D). Hence bipartite lattices can be divided into two inequivalent

Sc = − ∫
dτ ∫
dτ ′ Σ ψ†(τ )Gij(τ − τ ′)ψ (τ ′)
sublattices according to
 

i         j
0   0    ij
β
eiQ·x =
1 : x ∈ A sub-lattice
−1 : x ∈ B sub-lattice
.   (102)

+ ∫ dτ Σ U¯ij hψ†(τ )σ ψ (τ )i h(ψ†(τ )σ ψ (τ )i(9.7)
	
As in the normal state case (see Eq. (77)), the cluster action is represented in cluster real space 
and all the quantities are cluster Fourier transforms of the corre-sponding quantities in cluster 
K-space. The spinors of
The magnetic ordering thus reduces the translational

cell. Accordingly, the volume of the first Brillouin zone in the antiferromagnetic state is reduced 
to half the orig-inal volume and Q = (π, π) becomes a reciprocal lattice vector. Hence in neutron 
scattering experiments Bragg

Grassmann-variables ψ† = (γ∗ , γ ) and ψ = (ψ†)† gen-
peaks are found at the wave-vector Q corresponding to
i    i†  i↓     i    i

erate coherent states corresponding to the cluster Fourier transform of the Nambu-spinors Eq. (92). 
 In analogy, the corresponding cluster Hamiltonian in the supercon-
a period of two lattice spacings.
As a consequence of the translational symmetry break-ing, the correlation function

ducting state is obtained from the normal state cluster Hamiltonian Eq. (83) by representing it 
with the Nambu-
Gσ(k, k + Q; τ ) = −⟨Tτ ckσ
†
k+Qσ
⟩   (103)

spinors (92) and adding a U(1) symmetry breaking term
becomes finite. Along the lines of the formalism for the

†  ′      ′′
K
K
K ,   (98)
superconducting state it is thus convenient to introduce spinors

where η¯(K) = Nc/N  k˜ η(K + k˜) is the coarse-grained pair-field.
† = (c†

†
k+Qσ
) ; Ψkσ = (Ψ†
)†   (104)

After self-consistency is established by requiring that the Green function of the effective cluster 
model calcu-lated with the action Eq. (97) equals the coarse-grained Green function Eq. (95), the 
order parameter ∆k can be
for the antiferromagnetic state. In the presence of a staggered external magnetic field h(x) = h 
exp(iQ x) the non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian for bipar-tite lattices with Qk₊Q = −Qk then 
becomes H₀ =

calculated. Within the DCA the resolution in k-space is
restricted to the cluster K-points and the order parame-
′  †
kσ  kσ
(Qkσ₃ − σʰ σ₁)Ψkσ
where the prime on the sum

ter is coarse-grained
indicates summation over the reduced Brillouin zone
only. The corresponding Green function

∆¯ K
= Nc Σ⟨c

K+k˜†c−(K+k˜)↓
⟩ = F¯(K, τ = 0⁺)  (99)
Gσ(k, z) = ⟨⟨Ψkσ ; Ψ† ⟩⟩z            (105)

k˜
and given by the equal-time coarse-grained anomalous Green function F¯ as (after analytical 
continuation)
h        −1
= [zσₒ − (Qk − µ)σ₃ − σ 2 σ₁ − Σc(K, z)]  ,

F¯(K, τ = 0⁺) =  1 Σ F¯(K, iω )
with k = K + k˜, is coarse-grained over the DCA cells

β n G¯
(K) = Nc Σ G
(K + k˜)         (106)

1 ∫∞



 βω   ¯

σ      N    σ
k˜
 

	

21


where we dropped the frequency argument for conve-nience. The cluster excluded Green function
where  we  adopt  the  conventional  notation (Abrikosov et al., 1963) k = (k, iωn), k′ = (k, iωn′ 
),

Gσ(K, z) = [G¯ −1(K, z) + Σ

c,σ
(K, z)]−¹ . (107)
q = (q, iνn) and Tτ is the time ordering operator.
χσσ′ (q, k, k′) and the irreducible two-particle vertex

then has two elements, σ(K, K) and σ(K, K + Q). As a result, its Fourier transform to real space
function Γσσ′ (q, k, k′) (not to be confused with the single-particle hybridization function) are 
related to each other
through the Bethe-Salpeter equation

Gij,σ
=  1  Σ eiK·(Xi −Xj )G
(K)      (108)

′   0      ′   0      ′′
N                            χσσ′ (q, k, k ) = χσσ′ (q, k, k ) + χσσ′′ (q, k, k )

 1  Σ
 

iK·(X −X )

−iQ·x
× Γσ′′ σ′′′ (q, k



, k′′′
)χσ′′′ σ′ (q, k
′′′
, k′)    (111)

breaks translational symmetry. The action of the cor-responding cluster model in the 
antiferromagnetic state is then formally identical to the action in the paramag-netic state, Eq. 
(77). As in the superconducting state the corresponding cluster model is obtained from the 
para-magnetic cluster model Eq. (83) by changing the repre-sentation to the Nambu spinors Eq. (104) 
and adding a symmetry breaking term
constructed from a pair of fully-dressed single-particle
Green functions. As usual, a summation is to be made for repeated indices.
We now make the DCA substitution Γσσ′ (q, K + k˜, K′ + k˜′)  Γcσσ′ (q, K, K′) in Eq. (111) where Γc 
is the irreducible two-particle vertex calculated on the clus-ter (frequency labels have been 
suppressed). Note that
only the bare and dressed two-particle Green functions χ depend upon the superlattice wave-vectors 
k˜. Since χ

h †
−  σ 2 ΨKσσ₁ΨKσ
Kσ
,      (109)
and χ⁰ in the product on the RHS of Eq. (111) share no common momentum labels, we may freely sum 
over the wave-vectors k˜, yielding

to account for the external staggered magnetic field h.
After convergence, the sub-lattice magnetization m =
χ¯σσ′ (q, K, K′) = χ¯⁰ ′ (q, K, K′) + χ¯⁰ ′′ (q, K, K′′)

1/N  iσ eⁱQ·ˣi σ niσ may be calculated from the off-diagonal component of the Green function matrix
× Γc
σ′′
σ′′′ (q, K , K )χ¯σ′′′ σ′ (q, K , K ) . (112)

Eq. (106) according to
By coarse-graining the Bethe-Salpeter equation, we have
greatly reduced its complexity; each of the matrices

m =  1   σG¯
Nc Kσ
(K, K + Q; τ = 0−)       (110)
above is sufficiently small that they may be easily ma-nipulated using standard techniques.
₊∞              In contrast with the single-particle case where the

=   1 
Ncπ
Kσ −∞
dωf (ω)σℑmG¯σ
(K, K + Q; ω + iδ) .
coarse-grained quantities are identical to those of the cluster, the cluster quantity χcσσ′ (q, K, 
K′) is not equal to χ¯σσ′ (q, K, K′). This is because the self-consistency is established only at 
the single-particle level. Unlike the
single-particle case where both Σc(K) and G¯(K) are di-

F. Calculation of susceptibilities

A convenient way to identify continuous phase tran-sitions is to search for divergences of 
susceptibili-ties.  One particular advantage of quantum cluster theories is that they allow us to 
consistently calcu-late these susceptibilities from the corresponding cluster 
susceptibility(Hettler et al., 2000).  Unfortunately, the calculation of two-particle correlation 
functions in the
CDMFT formalism is strongly hampered by the viola-
rectly calculated, neither Γcσσ′ (q, K, K ) nor the coarse-grained susceptibility χ¯σσ′ (q, K, K′) 
are calculated dur-ing the self-consistency. Instead, the coarse-grained non-interacting 
susceptibility χ¯⁰ ′ (q, K, K′) is calculated in a separate program after the DCA converges using 
the relation
σσ′ [(q, iνn); (K, iωn); (K , iωn′ )] = δσσ′ δKK′ δωnωn′
N
×    G (K + k, iω )G (K + k + q, iω + ν ) (1.13)
n  σ         n   n
tion of translational invariance on the cluster. So, in this     k˜ section, we will restrict our 
attention to the calculation of

two-particle quantities in th DCA following Hettler et al.
(2000) and Jarrell et al. (2001b).
As a specific example, we describe here the calculation of the two-particle Green function
The corresponding cluster susceptibility is calculated by
the cluster solver, e.g. the QMC process, as discussed in Sec. III.C.1 and the vertex function is 
extracted by in-verting the cluster two-particle Bethe-Salpeter equation

∫ β ∫ β ∫ β ∫ β
χcσσ′ (q, K, K′) = χc⁰ ′ (q, K, K′) + χc⁰
′′ (q, K, K′′)

χσσ′ (q, k, k ) =
0  0  0  0
dτ₁dτ₂dτ₃dτ₄
×Γcσ′′ σ′′′ (q, K
′′, K
′′′
)χcσ′′′ σ′ (q, K′′′, K′)(1. 14)

× ei((ωn+ν)τ₁−ωnτ₂+ωn′ τ₃−(ωn′ +ν)τ₄)
If we combine Eqs. (114) and (112), then the coarse-
†         †
× ⟨Tτ ck+qσ(τ₁)ckσ(τ₂)ck′σ′ (τ₃)ck′+qσ′ (τ₄)⟩ , grained susceptibility may be obtained after 
elimination

22

of Γcσσ′ (q, K, K′) between the two equations. It reads
χ¯−¹ = χ−¹ − χ⁰−1 + χ¯⁰−1 ,    (115)
c   c
where, for example, χ¯ is the matrix formed from
χ¯σ,σ′ (q, K, K′) for fixed q. The charge (ch) and spin (sp) susceptibilities χch,sp(q, T ) are 
deduced from χ¯ according to


χch,sp(q, T ) =
(kBT )²
2
c
KKΣ′σσ′
λσσ′ χ¯σσ′ (q, K, K ) ,(116)

Figure 8 A few low-order diagrams in the irreducible self-energy of a quenched diagonally 
disordered system. Each cir-cle represents the scattering of a state k from sites denoted

where λσσ′ = 1 for the charge channel and λσσ′ = σσ′
for the spin channel. The calculation of particle-particle (i.e. pairing) susceptibilities follows 
from a straightfor-ward generalization of this formalism. The reader is re-ferred to prior articles 
on cluster QMC for more details on these topics (Jarrell et al., 2001b).
by X and a dotted line. The correlations between the elec-trostatic potentials on different sites 
are denoted by the wavy line.

shown in Fig. 8 which makes a contribution to the self-energy

 1   Σ
	


⟨V V ⟩G(k )G(k )G(k )

In this section, we describe cluster approximations for disordered systems. The mapping between the 
lattice and the cluster in the CDMFT and the molecular CPA (MCPA) is identical, and when the CDMFT 
is applied to disordered systems, it becomes identical to the MCPA (Ducastelle, 1974; Tsukada, 
1969). The MCPA and re-
lated techniques for disordered systems are extensively
ixi·(k1−k+k3−k2) ixj ·(k2−k1+k′−k3)

After averaging over the disorder configurations, V ²V ² becomes a function of xi  xj . We identify 
this average as D²². With translational invariance restored, we may complete the Fourier transform, 
and obtain

reviewed in Gonis (1992) and will not be discussed here.


δkk′


Σ D²²(q)G(k )G(k )G(k )

disordered systems that recovers the CPA for Nc = 1 and
becomes exact when Nc   . This is an extension of the formalism introduced by Jarrell and 
Krishnamurthy (2001), modified to include the effects of correlated dis-order (Jarrell and Johnson, 
2004). We consider an An-derson model with diagonal disorder, described by the Hamiltonian
(Nδq₊k2+k,k1+k3 − 1) .  (119)
It is easy to extend this argument to all orders in per-turbation theory. All graphs are composed 
of sums of products of Laue functions (e.g. ∆ = Nδq₊k2+k,k1+k3 ), and Green functions G(k) and 
Dⁿᵐ(q), where Dⁿᵐ(q) is the Fourier transform of Dⁿᵐ = ⟨V ⁿV ᵐ⟩.

Σ  †     †    Σ
A hierarchy of approximations may then be con-

H = −t

<ij>,σ
ciσcjσ + cjσciσ
+  (Vi − µ)niσ (117)
iσ
structed by approximating the Laue functions within the
graphs. These include the CPA where conservation of the internal momentum labels is completely 
neglected. Here, all of the Laue functions involving the internal mo-

where c† creates a quasiparticle on site i with spin σ and
mentum labels are set to one, ∆ = Nδk1+k2··· → 1. In

niσ = c† ciσ. The disorder occurs in the site occupancies labeled by ξi and in the local orbital 
energies Vi which describe the electrostatic potential at site i. We assume that Vi are quenched 
random variables distributed ac-cording to some specified probability distribution which includes 
the effects of intersite correlations.
The effect of the disorder potential  iσ Vini,σ may be described using standard diagrammatic 
perturbation the-ory (although we eventually sum to all orders). We per-
turb around the ordered state, described by the first term in Eq. (117).
Translational invariance and momentum conservation are restored by averaging over all allowed 
values of the site occupancies ξi and the corresponding disorder po-tentials Vi. We study this 
effect, e.g., on the sixth graph
this case we may freely sum over all internal momentum
labels, and all terms describing non-local correlations, such as those on the bottom of Fig. 8 
vanish, whereas the CPA graphs shown on top remain. Different clus-ter approximations, including 
the MCPA and the DCA may be constructed by systematically restoring momen-tum conservation through 
the appropriate choice of Laue function, as discussed in Sec. II.B
For the DCA, we divide the lattice into clusters as described in Fig. 3, write wave-vectors as k = 
K + k˜ and employ the DCA Laue function Eq. (58),
∆DCA = NcδK1 +K2 ,K3+K4 ... ,     (120)
such that momentum conservation is preserved only within the cluster reciprocal space K. With this 
choice

23


for the Laue function, we may freely sum over superlat-tice wave-vectors k˜ within each DCA 
coarse-graining cell (see Fig. 3). This leads to the replacement of the lat-
nm
system without configurational correlations. On a hy-percubic lattice of dimension D
D
tice propagators G(k) and D  (k) with coarse-grained                 Σ
gβγ(k) = g⁰,βγδ  + α (2δ  − 1)  cos(k ) .  (129)




G¯(K, z) = Nc   G(K + k˜, z),    (121)
N
The corresponding coarse-grained result is

k˜

D¯ nm(K) = Nc Σ Dⁿᵐ(K + k˜),   (122)


The first of these sums is straightforward; however, the second requires some investigation due to 
the powers of the potential.
Here, we calculate D¯ nm(K) for a binary A,B alloy
where the concentration of A atoms is c and that of B atoms is 1 c. This calculation can be 
generalized to mul-ticomponent alloys and may easily be extended for more
D
g¯βγ(K) = g⁰,βγδK,₀ + α (2δβγ − 1) R  cos(Kl) (130)
l=1


(Lc = N ¹/D is the linear cluster size). If we transform back to the cluster coordinates, then
g¯βγ = g⁰,βγ + Rα (2δβγ − 1) δi₊Q,j   (131)
are the configurational probabilities for the cluster, where Q labels the sites adjacent to i. In 
the CPA limit, Lc = 1 and thus R vanishes indicating the lack of any configu-

complex alloys. For the binary alloy, we employ an idem-potent formalism where the idempotent ξi = 
1 indicating
rational correlations. In the limit as Nc = LD R = 1, so correlations are systematically restored.
→ ∞,

that the site is occupied by an A atom, or ξi = 0 indicat-ing a B atom site. If we associate Vi = 
VA or VB for an
A or B atom, respectively, then Vi = ξiVA + (1 − ξi)VB. Then, since ξⁿ = ξi and (1 − ξi)ⁿ = 1 − ξi,
The cluster problem generated by the substitution
∆  ∆DCA may be solved numerically. Each of the diagrams in Fig. 8 representing Nc independent 
scat-ters, or less, remain finite; however, scattering diagrams for greater than Nc scatters 
vanish. The complexity of
n  m                 n             m

⟨Vi Vj ⟩ = ⟨(ξiVA + (1 − ξi)VB) (ξjVA + (1 − ξj)VB) ⟩
= ⟨(ξiV + (1 − ξi)V )(ξj V  + (1 − ξj)V )⟩
the problem is further reduced since the nontrivial sums
involve only the cluster momenta K ( numbering Nc

A        B    A
= V ⁿV ᵐgβγ
B
(123)
instead of N ). Furthermore, since these diagrams are

α β ij
where repeated indices in the last line are summed over and
the same as those from a finite-sized periodic cluster of
Nc sites, we can easily sum this series to all orders by numerically solving the corresponding 
cluster problem. The resulting algorithm is identical to that presented in

AA
ij
gAB
= ⟨ξiξj ⟩           (124)
= ⟨ξ (1 − ξ )⟩        (125)
Sec. II.B.4, except that: 1. In the coarse-graining step we must calculate both the coarse-grained 
correlation func-



ij  = ⟨(1 − ξi)(1 − ξj )⟩     (126)
g¯βγ(K) =
Nc Σ
gβγ(K + k˜).    (132)
are the joint probabilities for occupation of sites i and j              N  k˜
by atoms of the designated types.

This formalism may be generalized to a multicompo-nent alloy α = A, B, C, . . .. Since a site may 
only be occupied by an atom of one type only, in general
⟨Vi Vj ⟩ = Vα Vβ gij .      (127)
⟨V V  ⟩ is a linear function of the probabilities g  for
and the coarse-grained cluster Green function
G¯(K, z) = Nc Σ      1  (133)


2. We then solve the cluster problem by performing a weighted average of the cluster Green function 
(in matrix

all n and m. Thus, the effect of coarse-graining Dⁿᵐ(k) is equivalent to coarse-graining gβγ(k) for 
all n and m.
As an example, consider a binary alloy with only near-neighbor configurational correlations. Here 
we may write
notation in the cluster sites)
G = D G−1 − V

 −1E

(134)

gβγ = g⁰,βγ + α (2δβγ − 1) δi₊Q,j    (128) where Q indexes the near-neighbors to site i, and g⁰,AA 
=
c², g⁰,BB = (1  c)² and g⁰,AB = c(1  c) are the joint
probabilities for the occupation of different sites for a
over all disorder configurations. The weighting of each
configuration is determined by the Fourier transform of g¯βγ(K) to obtain the cluster 
configurational probabilities g¯βγ. After convergence is reached, the irreducible cluster 
quantities may be used to calculate the properties of the
lattice.

24

H. Alternative cluster methods

In this review we decided to focus on the three, in our view most established cluster methods. This 
section reviews several other ideas proposed to introduce non-local correlations, some of which are 
complementary to the approaches discussed.


1. Self-energy functional theory


The self-energy-functional approach developed by Potthoff (2003b) (see also Potthoff et al., 2003) 
is a very general unifying concept for existing cluster approaches and in addition provides the 
power to construct novel cluster algorithms. Similar to the formalism presented in Sec. II.B, this 
approach views the grand potential Ω as the central quantity. Here, the self-energy Σ is considered 
the basic dynamic variable and a self-energy functional Ω[Σ] = Tr ln( (G−¹  Σ)−¹) + F [Σ] is 
constructed from the Legendre-transform F [Σ] = Φ[G[Σ]]  Tr(ΣG[Σ]) of the Φ[G] functional. This 
approach proceeds with set-ting up a general variational scheme to use dynamical information from a 
(numerically) solvable reference sys-tem H′ = H₀(t′) + H₁(U) to approximate the physics of the 
original system H = H₀(t) + H₁(U). While the single-particle parts H₀ are generally different, the 
in-teraction part H₁(U) is kept fixed, to ensure that the functionals F [Σ] of the reference system 
and the origi-nal system share the same functional dependence. It can then be shown that the grand 
potential of the original system Ωt[Σ] can be evaluated exactly according to

Ωt[Σ(t′)] = Ω′ + Tr ln(−(G−¹ − Σ(t′))−¹)
− Tr ln(−G )        (135)
from the grand potential Ω′, the trial self-energy Σ(t′) and Green function G′ of the reference 
system. Varia-tion is then performed with respect to the single-particle parameters t′ of the 
reference system and the stationary point is determined by ∂Ωt[Σ(t′)]/∂t′ = 0.
The choice of a suitable and solvable reference system H′ given the original Hamiltonian H is in 
principle arbi-trary. Within the SFT, cluster approximations are con-structed from a reference 
system H′ that represents de-coupled clusters of size Nc which are optionally coupled to additional 
nb uncorrelated bath sites. A schematic illustration for the Hubbard model is shown in Fig. 9. A 
set of decoupled sites as a reference system H′ (not shown) yields the Hubbard-I approximation. 
Non-local correlations can be included by considering a system of decoupled clusters of size Nc > 
1. This approach is iden-tical to the CPT when the intra-cluster parameters t′ are fixed to the 
original values t : The self-energy of the ref-erence system, Σ(t′) = G′ −¹  G′−¹ is calculated 
once and used to approximate the Green function of the orig-inal lattice model, G−¹ = G−¹ − Σ(t′). 
This yields the
expression (47) of the CPT, G−¹ = G′−¹ − δt, since the



Figure 9 Taken from Potthoff et al. (2003). Various refer-ence systems H′ for the 2D Hubbard model 
on a square lat-tice. The solid and dashed lines represent the intra- and inter-cluster hopping 
respectively, the filled circles the on-site in-teraction U . Additional nb bath sites are depicted 
by open circles, while the shaded circles represent nb = ∞ bath sites.


bare Green-functions of the original and reference sys-tems only differ by the inter-cluster 
hopping δt.
Alternatively within the SFT the intra-cluster hopping t′ can be treated variationally. 
Calculations for the 1D Hubbard model (Potthoff et al., 2003) however show that the SFT functional 
Eq. (135) is stationary for t′ slightly larger but very close to the original value t, with the 
dif-ference becoming smaller as Nc increases. The SFT can also be used to find the correct boundary 
conditions of the CPT cluster. Calculations with fixed intra-cluster hopping t′ = t and additional 
variational hopping tr between the surface sites to simulate periodic boundary conditions show that 
the self-energy functional is only stationary at tr = 0 (open boundary conditions), not at tr = t 
(periodic boundary conditions) (Potthoff et al., 2003).
One shortcoming of the CPT is its inability to describe phases with broken symmetry due to the 
finite size of the clusters. The SFT can be used to construct a variational CPT, an extension of 
the CPT to account for long-range order (Dahnken et al., 2003). This is done by adding a fictitious 
symmetry breaking single-particle term to the reference system and subtracting it in the 
inter-cluster part so that it has no effect on the original lattice Hamil-tonian. The magnitude of 
this term is then optimized in the SFT variational treatment. Calculations for the 2D Hubbard model 
show very good agreement with varia-tional Monte Carlo and auxiliary field Quantum Monte Carlo 
results for the ground-state energy and the stag-gered magnetization (Dahnken et al., 2003).
Embedded cluster approximations are constructed if additional nb uncorrelated bath sites are 
introduced. The DMFT is obtained by choosing as a reference system a set of decoupled sites coupled 
to nb =  uncorrelated bath sites. The CDMFT is identical to a system of decoupled clusters coupled 
to nb = ∞ bath sites with the intra-

25


cluster parameters being fixed at the original values t and the bath parameters being treated as 
variational. It can then be shown (Potthoff et al., 2003) that the SFT self-energy functional is 
stationary at the bath parameters that fulfill the CDMFT self-consistency. A corresponding analysis 
of the DCA formalism within this approach is still lacking.
Intermediate approximations can be constructed by considering a finite number 0 < nb <   of bath 
sites. This approach is superior to the CPT and inferior to the CDMFT. For a reference system with 
Nc = 1 and nb = 1 this approach can be used to study the Mott transition in the Hubbard model 
(Potthoff, 2003a) analytically and it was shown to yield the same qualitative picture as the full
DMFT (Nc = 1, nb =  ) analysis (see Georges et al., 1996).
3. Non-local effects via spectral density approximation

Laad and van den Bossche (2000) proposed to include non-local 1/D-corrections by combining DMFT 
with the Spectral Density Approximation (SDA) (Roth, 1969) and applied this approach to the FKM 
(see Eq. (182)) for which it becomes particularly simple. In the SDA, the moments of the spectral 
function are determined (via re-peated evaluation of commutators with the Hamiltonian) by 
complicated but static correlators. For the FKM, to order 1/D the SDA self-energy of the d 
electrons, Σ₀,d(k, z) can be expressed in terms of the static sus-ceptibility of the f -electrons. 
This self-energy is purely real, but momentum dependent and is used to approxi-mate the bath 
self-energy in the hybridization function
2
Γ(z) = Σ      t  (138)

2. Fictive impurity models

Similar to the SFT approach discussed above, this very general approach by Okamoto et al. (2003) is 
centered on the self-energy Σ as the basic dynamic variable. It is based on the idea that the 
cluster model is merely an algorithm to calculate coefficients in an orthogonal function expansion 
of the momentum dependence of the electronic self-energy
Σ
for the effective impurity problem in D =  . The impu-rity self energy, Σimp,d(z) (see Brandt and 
Mielsch, 1989) combines with the bath self-energy Σ₀,d(k, z) to a dynam-ical, non-local self-energy 
of the form
Σd(k, z) = Σimp,d(z)+Σ₀,d(k, z)−   Σ₀,d(k, z) . (139)
k
This finally determines the Green function of the mo-bile d- electrons of the usual form, Gd(k, z) 
= [z − Qk + µ − Σd(k, z)]−¹, which is used together with Σd(k, z)

Σₐpprₒₓ(k, z) =    Φi(k)Σi(z) .   (136)
i=0...n

The coefficients Σi(z) can then be obtained from the so-lution of a n+1-site fictive impurity model 
involving n+1 mean-fields which are fixed by the requirement that the impurity model Green 
functions Gi equal the correspond-ing integrals over the lattice Green function

Gi(z) =  Φi(k)[G−¹(k, z) − Σₐpprₒₓ(k, z)]−¹ . (137)
k

To include local and nearest neighbor correlations, the momentum dependence of the self-energy may 
be ex-panded up to second order using the orthogonal functions Φ₀(k) = 1 and Φ₁(k) = eⁱᵏᵃ. Since in 
general the orthog-onal functions Φi(k) change sign over the Brillouin zone except for the local 
term i = 0, causality is not guar-anteed when the expansion is truncated at low order. However it 
is shown that simple filtering of the higher-order terms may be used to circumvent these problems 
(Okamoto et al., 2003).
The DCA may be viewed as a specific example of this approach, where the indices i correspond to the 
centers K of the DCA cells and the functions ΦK(k) are set to 1 if k is contained in the cell 
represented by K and 0 oth-erwise (see Fig. 3). Causality problems are thus avoided by using 
orthogonal functions which are non-negative ev-erywhere. The resulting approximants however have 
dis-continuities in momentum space.
to estimate the susceptibility of the f -electrons (see Laad and van den Bossche, 2000 for 
details). Σ₀,d(k, z) can then be recalculated to close the self-consistency loop.
With this method, Laad and van den Bossche stud-ied the DOS and the spectral function A(k, ω) of 
the FKM on a 2D square lattice. Their results agree well with known results and other studies like 
Hettler et al. (2000). On the other hand, the FKM is a particularly gentle test bed for their 
method, due to its effective im-purity nature (mobile electrons in a static background). For a 
model with true dynamics like the Hubbard model, it is unclear whether the method is even feasible 
(due to the additional spin-flip and pair-hopping correlators), and the limitation of a purely real 
bath self-energy is likely to be too restrictive.

4. Non-local corrections via projection technique

Using the projection technique Tien has developed a cluster extension of the DMFT by taking into 
account both local and non-local contributions to the dynamics within a relevant subspace of 
Liouville or operator space (Minh-Tien, 1998, 1999a,b, 2001; Tanh-Hai and Minh-Tien, 2001).  The 
information of a given subspace is stored in static susceptibility and frequency functions while 
the effects of the remain-ing subspace are collected in a dynamic memory func-tion.  The idea of 
Tien’s approach is to approximate

26


this memory function by a local quantity. Hence, non-local correlations are taken into account 
through static quantities (susceptibilities), while dynamical correlations are approximated by a 
local memory function.  If the relevant subspace is spanned by operators acting on the same or 
nearest-neighbor sites only, these quanti-ties can be calculated in an effective impurity model 
(Minh-Tien, 1998, 1999a) or, in an improved version, in a two-site cluster model (Minh-Tien, 1999b, 
2001; Tanh-Hai and Minh-Tien, 2001).
This approach has not been rigorously proven to be causal, however its application to the 
Falicov-Kimball (Minh-Tien, 1998, 1999b) and Hubbard model (Minh-Tien, 2001) shows that the 
spectral function is positive definite and the sum-rules of the first few mo-ments of the spectral 
densities are preserved. The ne-glect of non-local dynamical correlations however leads to spurious 
behavior at low temperatures: A Kondo res-onance emerges in the in 2D half-filled Hubbard model at 
low temperatures similar to the behavior observed in DMFT simulations but inconsistent with other 
cluster calculations which show a pseudogap down to the lowest temperatures (see Sec. IV.D.2). This 
shortcoming is due to the fact that the nearest-neighbor static correlations are proportional to 
the band-dispersion Qk. At the Fermi energy, Qk = 0, hence non-local correlations vanish and a 
Kondo-resonance is generated due to the local nature of the dynamical correlations.


5. Two-site correlations with composite operators

A dynamical non-perturbative two-site approximation for the Hubbard model based on the composite 
opera-tor method was developed by Matsumoto and Mancini (1997) and later adopted and improved by 
Stanescu and Phillips (Stanescu and Phillips, 2001, 2003a). By using Hubbard operators as a local 
basis which exactly di-agonalize the interaction part of the Hamiltonian, this approach recovers 
both the weak coupling U   t and strong coupling U   t limits of the Hubbard model. The memory 
function δm(k, ω) which collects the effects of dynamical correlations is expanded in a two-site 
ap-proximation as δm(k, ω) = δm₀(ω) + αkδm₁(ω) where αk = (cos kₓ + cos ky)/2 and δm₀ (δm₁) are the 
lo-cal (nearest-neighbor) contributions. Hence this method contains on-site and nearest-neighbor 
dynamical correla-tions. Unknown quantities are expressed in terms of re-solvents for the 
eigenstates of a two-site impurity system. The renormalization of these resolvents due to their 
cou-pling to the surrounding of the two-site system is treated within the non-crossing 
approximation.
The application of this technique to the Hubbard model shows qualitative agreement of the 
single-particle spectra (Matsumoto and Mancini, 1997) in 2D with fi-nite size QMC results and high 
accuracy of specific heat results (Stanescu and Phillips, 2001) as compared to the Bethe ansatz 
solution in 1D. Although this technique
includes only on-site and nearest-neighbor correlations, it already captures important signatures 
of correlations consistent with DCA/QMC results for larger clusters such as the existence of a 
Mott-Hubbard gap in the 2D Hubbard model for all values of U > 0 at low T (Stanescu and Phillips, 
2001) and the emergence of a pseudogap in the density of states due to antiferromag-netic 
correlations (Stanescu and Phillips, 2003a; see also Sec. IV.D).


III. QUANTUM CLUSTER SOLVERS

Cluster techniques map the lattice system onto a self-consistently embedded quantum cluster model.  
This chapter discusses the most promising numerical ap-proaches used to solve this cluster problem. 
After stress-ing some general difficulties faced by potential cluster solvers in Sec. III.A, we 
present several perturbative techniques, including second order perturbation theory in Sec. 
III.B.1, the fluctuation-exchange approximation in Sec. III.B.2, and the non-crossing approximation 
in Sec. III.B.3.  Section III.C reviews the application of non-perturbative, (numerically) exact 
techniques includ-ing Quantum Monte Carlo in Sec. III.C.1, Exact Diago-nalization (ED) in Sec. 
III.C.2 and the numerical renor-malization group in Sec. III.C.3.


A. General remarks

The fundamental difference between a finite size clus-ter and the effective cluster problem of 
quantum cluster theories is the existence of additional quantum mechani-cal bath degrees of 
freedoms in the latter. The simplest realization of such a system is of course the well-known 
Anderson impurity model (Anderson, 1961). In general, its ground state is a nontrivial many-body 
state, which is not perturbatively connected to states of simpler starting points like a 
non-interacting or a free impurity. Further-more, the excitations also are of many-body character 
and typically involve dynamically generated low-energy scales which depend non-analytically on 
system param-eters.  Consequently, any perturbation theory is faced with severe limitations 
concerning its region of applica-bility and the most successful techniques used to solve this 
fundamental problem of solid state theory are non-perturbative (Hewson, 1993).
Nevertheless, a variety of tools to approximately or nu-merically solve this model have been 
developed over the last 25 years (Hewson, 1993). Since the physics of the An-derson impurity model 
is very well understood (Hewson, 1993), this knowledge can be employed to judge the qual-ity of 
results and region of applicability of these various analytical or computational techniques at 
hand, a priori as well as a posteriori. This statement does also apply to a large extent to the 
DMFT, where an effective Ander-son impurity model plays the central role (Georges et al.,

27


1996; Pruschke et al., 1995).
The situation becomes much more involved for quan-tum cluster problems.  First, from a purely 
technical point of view, the complexity of the system can limit the applicability of a method on 
principal grounds or even rule it out as a potential cluster solver altogether. This aspect will be 
discussed for every technique in detail in the following sections.
Similarly important is a novel complexity of the physics entering already on the level of the bare 
cluster and largely complicating the task to judge the reliability and quality of results obtained 
with a certain method. With increasing cluster size not only high-energy states (charg-ing 
energies) – which are the only one present in the im-purity case – will couple to the quantum bath 
but also medium- and to some extent low-energy states (e.g. non-local spin fluctuations). Moreover, 
the latter already can and in general will contain interesting many-body effects. The coupling to 
the bath can then lead to a subtle inter-play or even competition between such intrinsic many-body 
effects and those introduced by quantum fluctu-ations in the external bath. A well-established 
exam-ple is the occurrence of a quantum phase-transition in the two-impurity Kondo model (Jones and 
Varma, 1987; Jones et al., 1988) driven by the competition between the RKKY magnetic interaction 
favoring a non-local singlet and the Kondo effect with its local singlet formation.
In contrast to the single impurity case where the qual-itative results to be expected from a 
calculation can in principle be read off the input parameters, such a vi-tal possibility of a 
plausibility check for a given method does not exist in case of quantum cluster models. Ex-perience 
tells that even at first sight physically plau-sible results need to be checked carefully. Again, 
the two-impurity Kondo model can serve as a pedagogi-cal example.  The original, quite intuitive 
result by Jones et al. (1988) has later been reexamined by others and found to be valid only under 
very special circum-stances (Sakai and Shimizu, 1992; Sakai et al., 1990). A fully satisfactory 
understanding of the physics of this sim-
B. Perturbative techniques

The numerical effort to compute the cluster self-energy increases rapidly with the cluster size, in 
principle ex-ponentially for exact methods. This calls for simpler methods for which the complexity 
of the problem can be reduced. This can be achieved by perturbation the-ory in its many variations. 
One example is the standard weak-coupling perturbation theory in the electronic in-teraction U . 
Second Order Perturbation Theory (SOPT) and the more elaborate Fluctuation Exchange Approxi-mation 
(FLEX) are discussed in the following sections. A complementary strong-coupling approach handles 
the in-teraction exactly, but treats the coupling to the host Γ in a perturbative expansion. An 
example for this approach is the Non-Crossing Approximation (NCA), discussed in Sec. III.B.3.


1. Second order perturbation theory

Second order perturbation theory has proven very use-ful to solve the effective impurity problem of 
the DMFT. This iterated perturbation theory (IPT) becomes ex-act in the weak coupling limit U/t   1 
and coinci-dently at half-filling even in the strong coupling limit U/t   1 (Georges et al., 1996). 
The IPT was shown to give results in good qualitative agreement with non-perturbative DMFT results, 
e.g. it captures the Mott-transition at half-filling.
The application of second order perturbation theory in the context of quantum cluster theories 
follows immedi-ately from the formulation in Sec. II.B by considering the
first and second order diagrams in the cluster functional Φ[G¯] and neglecting higher-order 
diagrams. Here we il-lustrate the formalism for the Hubbard model with local
interaction U . For the DCA, an expression for the cluster self-energy Σc = δΦ[G¯]/δG¯ may be 
obtained by introduc-ing the bare particle-hole susceptibility, i.e. the ”bubble”.
With the notation K = (K, iωm), Q = (Q, iνn) we have

plest quantum cluster model is in fact lacking until today. Things are further complicated for the 
case of cluster
χph
(Q) =  UT  G¯(K + Q)G¯(K) ,   (140)
Nc

mean-field theories due to the “backflow” of the complex local physics via the effective bath. An a 
priori under-standing of the behavior of the system is, at least given the current level of 
knowledge, virtually impossible, but also an a posteriori plausibility check is rather based on 
subjective physical intuition than on solid understanding of the basic physics.
Thus, in order to obtain a reliable and consistent un-derstanding of the physics of correlated 
electron systems in the framework of cluster mean-field theories, it is vital to employ a variety 
of complementary and possibly non-perturbative tools to solve the effective quantum cluster model. 
We therefore discuss in detail different computa-tional and analytical tools regarding their 
applicability and reliability.
K
where T is the temperature and G¯ is the coarse-grained Green function defined in Eq. (59).  Note 
that ωm is a fermionic Matsubara frequency, while νn is of bosonic type. The cluster self-energy to 
second order in U is then given by
UT      ¯
c     Nc    ph
Q

We ignored the constant (first order) Hartree term which just shifts the chemical potential. 
Physically, the self-energy accounts for the interaction of electrons with virtually excited 
electron-hole fluctuations described by χph. Eq. (141) is a convolution of the susceptibility and



the Green function in both momentum and Matsubara frequencies, and thus can be readily computed via 
Fast Fourier transform (FFT). FFTs scale only logarithmi-cally with size, so a much larger range of 
cluster sizes is
28

and the trace T r denotes (T/Nc)  Q  n. In addition to the particle-hole bubble Eq. (140), the 
particle-particle susceptibility χpp also appears and is defined by

available for perturbative studies of this kind. For real frequencies, the use of FFT is less 
appealing, since FFT
χpp
(Q) = UT  G¯(Q  K)G¯(K) .   (146)
Nc

also requires an equidistant grid of frequencies. Com-pared to the usual expression for a finite 
size system, in
the DCA we use the coarse-grained Green function G¯ for evaluating the susceptibility and the 
self-energy, so the
K
With the generating functional of Eq. (142) the cluster self-energy can be written as
Σ (K) = UT Σ V ⁽ᵖʰ⁾(Q)G¯(K − Q)

momentum sums run over the Nc cluster momenta K, Q.
For the CDMFT, one can formulate similar expressions, but, as discussed in Sec. II, the self-energy 
and Green function are matrices in cluster real space. The matrix
c    Nc

Q
−V ⁽ᵖᵖ⁾(Q)G¯(Q − K) ,   (147)

inversions needed during the iteration become costly as
where the so called FLEX potentials are given by

the cluster size is increased.
It must be emphasized that simple minded application of FFT to Green functions (in particular with 
fermionic Matsubara frequencies) is likely to incur large errors, due


and
V (ph) = −χ
1  χph  3  χph  
ph + 2 1 + χ  + 2 1 − χ  ,  (148)

the discontinuity at zero imaginary time that leads to the slow 1/iωn decay of the Green functions 
and self-energies. The way to deal with this is to manually subtract the
V (pp) = −χpp
 χpp  
+     .      (149)
1 + χpp

slowly decaying parts before application of the FFT. This is possible as the high frequency 
behavior can be analyti-cally determined. The subtraction leads to functions that decay 
sufficiently fast to have a numerically well defined transform, even though one has to cut off the 
Matsubara sums in Eqs. (140,141) at a finite value. Details on this subtraction technique can be 
found in Deisz et al. (2003).

2. Fluctuation exchange approximation

FLEX (Bickers et al., 1989; Bickers and White, 1990) extends the second order perturbation theory 
through higher order diagrams. It rests on the assumption that the interacting electron system can 
be considered as a problem of electrons exchanging self-consistently deter-mined fluctuations of 
various kinds, i.e.  density, spin and pair fluctuations. In the context of quantum clus-ter 
theories, the FLEX was first applied within the DCA by Aryanpour et al. (2003a). Here we briefly 
review the corresponding formalism. The generating functional Φ of the FLEX is a sum of the three 
fluctuation contributions (Bickers et al., 1989)
Φ = Φᵈᶠ + Φˢᶠ + Φpp , (142)
The FLEX potentials constitute an infinite sum of fluctu-
ation diagrams similar to the series of density fluctuations also known as the Random Phase 
Approximation, which is in fact a subset of the FLEX. However, the FLEX also includes significant 
spin and pair fluctuations. Note that second order perturbation theory is reproduced by expanding 
Eq. (148) to first order in χph.
Naturally, the drawback of using these weak-coupling methods lies in the fact that some strong 
coupling phe-nomena such as the opening of a Mott gap at half-filling simply cannot be described by 
e.g. the FLEX approach. Also, quite often the self-consistent evaluation simply does not converge, 
particularly at low temperatures. This is due to divergences showing up in perturbatively 
eval-uated response functions. As a result, the variety of sys-tems that can be studied is limited.
To obtain real time (or frequency) data, an analytic continuation of the Green function or 
self-energy is neces-sary. For the FLEX, this is achieved by means of Pad´e ap-proximation (Vidberg 
and Serene, 1977). Real frequency results and details on the implementation of the Pad´e 
ap-proximation can be found in Aryanpour et al. (2003b).

3. Non-crossing approximation


where
df   1
ph = − 2 Tr [χph
ph  ph
]² + 1 Tr [ln(1 + χ ) −
The Non-Crossing Approximation (NCA) (Grewe, 1983; Keiter and Czycholl, 1983; Keiter and Kimball, 
1971; Kuramoto, 1983) was originally developed for the

1
ph + 2 χ ph] ,   (143)
single-impurity Anderson model and is based on a di-
agrammatic perturbation theory (Keiter and Kimball, 1970; Kuramoto, 1983) around the atomic limit 
of this
Φsf = 3 Tr [ln(1 − χ  ) + χ     2  ] ,   (144)   model.  A comprehensive and detailed description 
of

ph  2
ph   ph + 2 χ ph
the NCA and its limitations can be found in the re-view by Bickers (1987).  The NCA has been exten-

Φ  = Tr [ln(1 + χ
) − χ
² ] ,    (145)
sively applied as an approximate solution of the effec-


29


single-band Hubbard model (Pruschke et al., 1993a,b), the three-band Hubbard model (Lombardo et 
al., 1996; Schmalian et al., 1996; Maier et al., 1999a,b; Zo¨lfl et al., 2000) and the Anderson 
lattice model (Kim et al., 1990; Kuramoto, 1985). Within quantum cluster theories, the NCA has been 
extended to solve the effective cluster problem of the DCA by Maier et al. (2000b). The aim of this 
section is to convey the general concepts of the NCA method and discuss the extensions necessary to 
solve the effective cluster model of quantum cluster theories.
The perturbation theory used to construct the NCA is based on a resolvent technique and is in 
general applicable to problems where a discrete level system not representable by standard 
fermionic or bosonic op-erators is coupled to continuous degrees of freedom (Becker and Keller, 
1987; Kuramoto, 1983). The discrete level system in the context of the DCA is given by the 
eigenstates of the local part of the cluster Hamiltonian, Eq. (83),
Feynman diagram technique cannot be used for a pertur-bational expansion and the concept of 
resolvents must be introduced instead (Kuramoto, 1983). The matrix-elements of these resolvents in 
the space of the local eigenstates have the form
R−¹ (z) = (z − Em)δmn − ΣR (z) ,   (155)
where the resolvent self-energy ΣR(z) collects renormal-ization effects of the individual molecular 
states  m due to the hybridization Eq. (154) to the host. We note that ΣR(z) and hence R(z) reduce 
to diagonal matrices if the hybridization term Hhyb commutes with the lo-cal part Hc,lₒc of the 
cluster Hamiltonian. While this is the case in the paramagnetic state we stress that the 
non-diagonal elements become essential in the symmetry-broken phases (Maier, 2001; Maier et al., 
2000a).
Hc,lₒc = Σ(Q¯K − µ)c† cKσ          (150)

Kσ
Σ Σ U¯ (Q) †  †

Figure 10 Non-crossing diagrams for the resolvent self-energy

+
K,K′ σσ′
Q
2Nc
cK+QσcK′ −Qσ′ cK′σ′ cKσ .
ΣR. The dashed line stands for the dressed resolvent R de-fined in Eq. (155), the full line for the 
host electrons.


The perturbative expansion is performed with respect to the coupling
Keeping only the lowest order, self-consistent diagrams for the resolvent self-energy ΣR 
illustrated in Fig. 10 de-fines the NCA. Since the hybridization with the host de-

˜ †
Kσ
K,k˜,σ
aK+k˜σ
+ h.c.]   (151)
grees of freedom enters the expressions only in the form of a density of states

to the continuous degrees of freedom, i.e. the auxil-
 1 Σ |V
(k˜)|2δ(ω − λ
1
) =   mΓ (K, ω)(1,56)

iary non-interacting fermions a  (a† ). Hence the NCA   N k˜
should be an especially useful approximation where the
K+k˜
− π ℑ  c

local energy scales (in this case U¯ ) exceeds the magnitude of the coupling V to the host.
To apply the resolvent technique, the fermionic clus-ter operators c  , (c† ) are expanded in terms 
of the Hubbard-operators Xmn = |m⟩⟨n|
cKσ = Σ CᵐⁿXmn  ,  c  = Σ C  Xnm  (152)
there is no need to explicitly calculate the auxiliary host
parameters VK(k˜) and λk of the cluster Hamiltonian, Eq. (83). To ensure that the solution of the 
cluster prob-
lem is also the solution of the coarse-grained lattice prob-lem, Γc(K, z) is replaced with the 
hybridization function Γ(K, z) (see Eq. (82)) determined from coarse-graining the lattice Green 
function. After observing energy, mo-

Kσ
m,n
Kσ     Kσ
m,n
mentum and spin conservation, the analytical expression for the resolvent self-energy within the 
NCA reads

where {|m⟩} are the eigenstates of the local Hamiltonian,
R    1 Σ Σ

Eq. (150),

Hc,lₒc = Σ EmXmm      (153)
Σmn(z) = − π
 ∫+∞

K,σ l,l′
×           (157)



with eigenenergies Em and Cᵐⁿ = ⟨m|cKσ|n⟩. In this
−∞
dεf (ε)ℑmΓ(K, ε)CKσ Rll′ (z + ε)CKσ

Kσ
representation, the hybridization term Eq. (151) becomes
∫+∞


lm ∗
l′n 


Hhyb =
Σ Σ[VK(k˜)Cᵐⁿ∗Xnma

K+k˜σ

+ h.c.] . (154)
+  dεf (−ε)ℑmΓ(K, ε)CKσ
−∞
Rll′ (z − ε)CKσ  .

K,k˜,σ m,n

Since the Hubbard operators Xmn do not obey stan-dard fermionic commutation relations, the 
conventional
The coupled equations (155) and (157) are solved self-consistently to compute the matrix-elements 
of the resol-vent R(z). By using the expansion Eq. (152), the cluster



Green function Gc(K, z) =  cKσ
terms of Hubbard operators


Kσ⟩⟩z is written in
30

(like for instance uncoupled sites in a cluster calcula-tion). An inclusion of these so-called 
vertex corrections
to the bare NCA defined by Eq. (157) has up to now been

Σ  mm′
nn′ ∗
⟨⟨X
; X  ⟩⟩ .
possible only for the single impurity model with finite U

Gc(K, z) =
m,n,m′,n′
CKσ CKσ
mm′
n′n
z

(158)
(Pruschke and Grewe, 1989), because the complexity and number of the additional diagrams rather 
fast exceeds all

Within the NCA, the correlation function on the right hand side reduces to a convolution between 
resolvents
+∞
−βε
practical limits (Heindl et al., 2000).
Neglecting vertex corrections in practice means that the magnitude of a possible Fermi liquid scale 
will be grossly underestimated. However, in the case of strong

⟨⟨Xmm′ ; Xn′n⟩⟩z =
dεe
Zc
−∞
[ρnm(ε)Rm′ n′ (ε + ω)
non-local fluctuations, as one would expect in 2D prob-lems, such a scale will in general be 
extremely small or

−ρm′n′ (ε)Rnm
(ε − ω)] ,   (159)
even zero anyway. Here, the influence of vertex correc-
tions can be expected to be less severe and the NCA even

where ρnm(ω) =  1/π mRnm(ω + iδ) is the spectral
+∞
c    n         nn
the cluster partition function and β = 1/T the inverse temperature.
quantitatively reliable.
Even with these restrictions, the NCA still becomes formidable as the cluster size Nc increases. 
The number of eigenstates and hence number of coupled equations
(155, 157) that have to be solved self-consistently grows

Although the application of the NCA was illustrated
for the DCA cluster model, the NCA can in principle
like nNc , where n

imp
is the number of Fock states of

also be applied to solve the CDMFT cluster problem, Eq. (79). The fact that in the CDMFT the 
hybridization function Γ is a matrix in the Nc cluster sites however complicates this task 
considerably.
One of the great advantages of this resolvent pertur-bation theory and the NCA as approximation is 
that it can be solved for real frequencies, i.e. a cumbersome and problematic analytic continuation 
as in the case of QMC simulations is not necessary. Moreover, one can show analytically that it can 
produce a low-energy scale de-pending non-analytically on the bare model parameters 
(Mu¨ller-Hartmann, 1984) and that certain general fea-tures like universality in this energy scale 
are present, too (Fischer, 1997). Surprisingly, the NCA is capable of recovering a variety of 
complex features in thermo-dynamic and dynamic quantities of the single impurity Anderson model at 
U =  (Bickers, 1987). However it was realized rather quickly from the numerical solution of the NCA 
equations (Grewe, 1983; Kuramoto, 1983) as well as an approximate analytical treatment at T = 0 
(Mu¨ller-Hartmann, 1984) that the NCA shows serious deficiencies in its low temperature/low energy 
behav-ior. More precisely, it generates unphysical power-law structures in the low-energy behavior 
of physical quan-tities (Mu¨ller-Hartmann, 1984). Nevertheless there ex-ists a finite window from 
high down to temperatures of the order of an effective Fermi liquid scale where the NCA produces 
reliable and physically sensible re-sults (Bickers, 1987; Cox and Grewe, 1987; Fischer, 1997; 
Pruschke et al., 1993b).
A rather different question is whether these results are
only qualitatively or even quantitatively correct. Here, the answer critically depends on the 
system under con-sideration. Going beyond a single Anderson impurity at U =   introduces the 
necessity to include dia-grams beyond the lowest order NCA (Bickers et al., 1987; Pruschke and 
Grewe, 1989) to at least ensure a correct reproduction of energy scales or exactly known limits
the isolated impurity (e.g. nimp = 4 in the Hubbard
model, nimp = 3 in the t-J model). Thus, although the study of larger clusters is in principle 
possible, the NCA technique is very limited in cluster size and so far has only been applied to Nc 
= 4 size clusters.


C. Non-perturbative techniques

Non-perturbative techniques solve the effective cluster problem (numerically) exact. This advantage 
comes at the expense that only small cluster sizes can be treated. The size restriction on the 
cluster QMC technique de-scribed in the following section is basically the same as in the case of 
FSS QMC. For the ED and NRG approaches discussed in the next sections, however, a Hamiltonian for 
both the cluster and host degrees of freedom needs to be explicitly simulated, further limiting the 
usefulness of these methods.


1. Quantum Monte Carlo

a. Introduction.  Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) is a powerful and general technique for quantum cluster 
prob-lems. QMC has several advantages including the ability to treat relatively large clusters, the 
simplicity of the re-quired code, and the fact that only the cluster excluded
Green function  and the coarse-grained interaction U¯
are required as inputs. QMC is also numerically exact with small and controllable sources of 
systematic and statistical error. Its disadvantages include the fact that there is a minus sign 
problem which is unpredictable, difficulties in calculating real-frequency results, and the 
numerical expense of the approach.
The QMC algorithm for clusters is based on the Hirsch and Fye algorithm which was developed to 
simulate the Anderson impurity problem (Hirsch and Fye, 1986). It

31


Nc Nl

was later generalized to solve the DMFT and DCA effec-
tive impurity problems by Jarrell (1992) and Jarrell et al.
−        i,l,σ
σsi,l
γi,l−1,σ
(162)

(2001b), respectively. Although the algorithm is formu-lated using a path integral in imaginary 
time, the Maxi-mum Entropy Method may be used to analytically con-tinue the QMC data to obtain 
real-frequency spectra (Jarrell and Gubernatis, 1996).
The QMC algorithm uses the action of the effective cluster model, Eq. (77) as a starting point and 
there-fore can be equally applied within the CDMFT and the DCA. It thus requires as inputs the 
initial bare Green function  , and the form of the coarse-grained interac-
tion³ U¯ . This is an advantage, since due to the required
self-consistency of embedded cluster techniques, we gen-
i=1 l=1 σ
where l denotes the time slice τl and  (i, l; i′, l′)
ii′ (τl  τl′ ) the cluster excluded Green function defined in Eq. (76). Now we integrate out the 
remaining clus-ter Grassmann variables. The partition function then becomes
Z ∝ ∫ D[γ]D[γ∗]e−Sc[γ,γ∗]
= T r{si,l} Y det Gcσ;si,l    (163)

erally do not know the auxiliary parameters of the cluster  where factors which are fixed during 
the QMC process

Hamiltonian.
Several steps are required to evaluate the path integrals of this action using QMC. We first 
introduce Hubbard-
have been ignored.  Gcσ;sil −1 is the inverse cluster Green function matrix with elements

Stratonovich (HS) fields required to decouple the inter-action, transforming a problem of 
interacting electrons
 Gcσ;sil
−1
i,j,l,l′
−1
i,j,l,l
− δi,j
δl′ ,l−1
ασs
i,l
.  (164)

and bosons to one of non-interacting particles coupled to time-dependent HS fields. The fermionic 
and bosonic fields are then integrated out, and the integrals over the decoupling fields are 
performed with a Monte Carlo algo-rithm. Measurements of any diagrammatic quantity are accomplished 
by decomposing the associated operators using Wick’s theorem (both connected and disconnected 
contractions must be included) and then averaging the result over the Monte Carlo generated field 
configura-tions.


b. QMC for the simple Hubbard Model.  As a specific ex-ample, we consider the simple Hubbard model 
with a local interaction of strength U . Since this interaction
A Monte Carlo algorithm is used to perform the re-
maining integral over the HHS fields.  The Markov process in this algorithm proceeds by suggesting 
local changes of the HHS fields at one point in space-time. These changes are accepted or rejected 
according to the change in their Boltzmann weight, the argument of the trace in Eq. (163). If the 
change is accepted, the Green function must be updated accordingly. Several approxi-mations, i.e. 
changes to these equations that are beyond linear order in ∆τ , are necessary to obtain an 
efficient algorithm. First, we re-exponentiate the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (164), 
obtaining in a simple matrix notation in space-time
Gc−¹ = G−1 − T eVσ − 1 ,      (165)
is local, it is unaffected by coarse-graining, so U¯ = U .

To approximate the time-integrals in the action, we in-troduce a discrete time grid of length L and 
time step
∆τ = β/L. The interacting part of the action is then decoupled by mapping it to an auxiliary Ising 
field via a discrete Hirsch-Hubbard-Stratonovich (HHS) transfor-mation (Hirsch, 1983) ,
e−∆τ U Σ i(ni↑−1/2)(ni↓−1/2)
where T is δi,jδl−₁,l′ and Vσ(i, l)  αsi,lσ. Note that the
term in the parenthesis is beyond zeroth order in ∆τ . Therefore, to first order in ∆τ , we may 
write
Gc−¹ = G−1 + G−1 − 1  eVσ − 1  ,   (166)
since −¹  1 =  T + (∆τ ). Therefore, the inverse Green functions for two different field 
configurations,
{sil} and {sil}, are related by

= 1 e−∆τ U/4 Y Σ eαsi(ni↑−ni↓) ,  (160)

′ −1   ′    −1           ′

2
i si=±1
Gcσ  e−Vσ = Gcσ e−Vσ − e−Vσ + e−Vσ .   (167)
V ′

where cosh(α) = e
∆τ U/2
and the index i denotes the
Or, after multiplying by e σ , and collecting terms

cluster sites. With this change, the cluster action takes the form
G ′ −1 − G −¹ = (G −¹ − 1)e−Vσ (eV ′ − eVσ ) . (168)

∗    Σ  ∗   −1    ′ ′


Multiplying from the left by Gc and from the right by



G ′ = G  + (G
′
− 1)(e   − 1)G
(169)


or
3 It is also possible to treat the interaction in a self-consistent
cσ   cσ    cσ



−1
σ      cσ


′

manner, as was described in (Hettler et al., 2000)
Gcσ Gc′
= 1 + (1 − Gcσ )(eVσ −Vσ − 1) .   (170)

32

The QMC algorithm proposes changes in the Hubbard-  c. Measurements.  Several points must be 
considered

Stratonovich field configuration si,l   s′ , and ac-cepts these changes with the transition 
probability Ps→s′ . Thus, to implement the algorithm, we need Ps→s′ and a relation between the 
cluster Green functions Gc and Gc′ for the two different auxiliary field configurations. To 
simplify the notation, we introduce a combined space-time index i = (i, l), and consider only local 
changes in the fields sm → s′ = −sm. As can be inferred from Eq. (163), the probability of a 
configuration {si} is Ps ∝ det(Gc  ) det(Gc  );  on the other hand
detailed balance requires Ps′ Ps′ →s = PsPs→s′ for all s′. We may satisfy this requirement either 
by defining the transition probability Ps′ →s = R/(1 + R), where
when making measurements in the QMC procedure. First, for a given configuration of the HHS fields, 
the problem is non-interacting. Thus, the estimators of any correlation function may be constructed 
by taking all al-lowed Wick’s contractions (both connected and discon-nected). Therefore, any 
quantity which may be repre-sented in terms of the Green functions (and perhaps the HHS fields 
themselves), may be measured. Second, great care must be taken when constructing the estimators of 
the measurements. Different estimators may yield differ-ent results due the systematic and 
statistical error in the QMC procedure. It is important to choose the optimal form of the estimator 
of each measurement, and then use all the prior knowledge (exact limits, symmetries, etc.)

R  Ps  Ps′
 det(Gc′ ) det(Gc′ )
=
det(Gc†) det(Gc↓)
(171)
that we have to reduce the error.
For example, one difficulty encountered with the QMC algorithm is that a reliable transform from 
imaginary-

is the relative weight of two configurations, or by setting Ps′ →s = minimum(R, 1). The first 
choice is called the “heat bath” algorithm, and the second the “Metropolis” algorithm which is 
generally, but not always, superior. If the difference between two configuration is due to a flip 
of a single Hubbard Stratonovich field at the mth location in the cluster space-time (Hirsch and 
Fye, 1986), we obtain from Eq. (170)



time quantities to Matsubara frequencies is required. A careful treatment of the frequency 
summation or the imaginary-time integration is crucial in order to ensure the accuracy and the 
stability of the algorithm and to maintain the correct high-frequency behavior of the Green 
function. We need to evaluate the following inte-gral
∫ β
	



σ

For either the Metropolis or the heat bath algorithm, if the change is accepted, we must update the 
Green func-tion accordingly. The relationship between Gc and Gc′ is given by Eq. (169)
But from the QMC, we know the function Gc(K, τ ) only at a discrete subset of the interval [0, β]. 
As may be read-ily seen by discretizing the above equation, the estimation of Gc(K, iωn) becomes 
inaccurate at high-frequencies. This is formalized by Nyquist’s theorem which tells us that above 
the frequency ωc =  π  unpredictable results

′
σ,ij
= Gcσ,ij
+  (Gcσ,im −


δim


)(e−ασ(sm −s′ )
−ασ(sm −s′ )


Gcσ(,m17j3.)
are produced by conventional quadrature techniques. For example, a rectangular approximation to the 
integral in Eq. (174) yields a Gc(K, iωn) that is periodic in ωn. This

1 + (1 − Gcσ,mm)(e
m − 1)
presents a difficulty since causality requires that

The QMC procedure is initialized by setting Gcσ,ij =
G , and choosing the corresponding field configuration

lim
ωn→∞

Gc(K, iωn
1
) =
iωn

.     (175)

ij
with all si = 0.  Then we use Eq. (173) to create a Green function corresponding to a meaningful 
field con-figuration (i.e. si =  1, for each i = (i, l) or the  si from a previous run or 
iteration) and proceed by step-ping through the space-time of the cluster, proposing lo-cal changes 
si   si. We accept the change if Ps′ →s is greater than a random number between zero and one and 
update the Green function according to Eq. (173). After roughly one hundred warm-up sweeps through 
the space-time lattice of the cluster, the system generally comes into equilibrium and we begin to 
make measurements.
This problem may be avoided by using the high fre-quency information from other sources. For 
example, the second-order perturbation theory result, Eq. (141) has the correct asymptotic 
behavior. Alternatively, we can use the Green function from the previous iteration which has the 
correct high frequency behavior. We then com-pute the Matsubara-frequency Green function from the 
imaginary-time QMC Green function as (Jarrell et al., 1993)
Gc(K, iωn) = Gc,pt(K, iωn) +          (176)
∫ β



⁴ If Ps is not positive definite, then |Ps| is used as the sampling weight, and its sign is 
appended to the measurement. I.e. for a measurement m and sign S, ⟨m⟩P = ⟨mS⟩|P | / ⟨S⟩|P |.
dτeⁱωnτ (Gc(K, τ )  Gc,pt(K, τ )) .
0
where Gc,pt is any Green function with the correct high-frequency behavior. The integral is 
computed by first



interpolating the difference Gc(K, τ )  Gc,pt(K, τ ) us-ing an Akima spline, and then integrating 
the spline (a technique often called oversampling).  The smooth Akima spline suppresses spurious 
high frequency behav-ior so that Gc(K, iωn) = Gc,pt(K, iωn) when ωn   ωc. The resulting 
self-energy, extracted from Σc(K, iωn) = 1/ (K, iωn)  1/Gc(K, iωn) is still not accurate at high 
frequencies since it reflects either the perturbation the-ory or the previous iteration. However, 
the exact high frequency form is known. Thus, we can fit the high fre-quency self energy, at 
frequencies at or below the Nyquist cutoff π/(∆τ ), to the form
Σc(K, iωn) ≈ a(K)/(iωn) + b(K)/ω² .   (177)
In some cases a and b are known exactly.  We may then append this form onto the self-energy at 
frequen-cies higher than π/(∆τ ).

2. Exact diagonalization

The Lanczos ED method (Haydock et al., 1975) pro-vides a numerical way to diagonalize the 
Hamiltonian of a finite size system. Since the cluster model in the CPT formalism is identical to 
the model of a finite size system with open boundary conditions, the regular Lanczos ED method can 
be applied in this case without modification (S´en´echal et al., 2000). For the cluster model of 
embed-ded cluster theories however, it needs to be generalized to account for the self-consistent 
coupling to the host. ED has been used to solve the impurity problem of the DMFT (Caffarel and 
Krauth, 1994; Si et al., 1994).  It is natural that it can be extended to be used as a clus-ter 
solver in quantum cluster theories. This was demon-strated by Bolech et al. (2003) in an 
application of the CDMFT to the 1D Hubbard model. The general method of exact diagonalization 
(Haydock et al., 1975) need not be reviewed here. We only outline the specific implemen-tation 
necessary for a cluster theory.
ED is a wave function based method, i.e. it is applied to diagonalize the effective cluster 
Hamiltonian, e.g. the
Hamiltonian in Eq. (79). To this end, the hybridization function Γ(z) (see Eq. (78)) is fitted to 
the form
Γij (z) = Σ Vil(k˜)[z − λ(k˜)]−¹V ∗ (k˜) ,   (178)


to obtain estimates for the auxiliary parameters of the host, λij (k˜) and Vij (k˜). In order to 
apply ED to the cluster Hamiltonian, the auxiliary host degrees of free-
dom, i.e. the sum over k˜, must be discretized to a finite set of Nh orbitals. Applying ED to the 
resulting Hamil-
tonian, one can then compute a cluster self-energy Σᶜ (Caffarel and Krauth, 1994), and from the 
cluster self-energy a new estimate of the coarse grained Green func-
33

number of wave-vectors Nh representing the host. For ED to be feasible, the total number of ”sites” 
N = Nc + Nh must be of the order of N  20. Furthermore, for the distinction of the lattice into 
cluster and host to make sense, Nh  Nc. This size limitation is possibly prohibitive for anything 
but 1D systems. Moreover, by applying ED to solve the cluster model one abandons the thermodynamic 
limit, i.e. one of the advantages of cluster mean-field theories. Still, ED is an exact method and 
can deal with more complicated interactions than the simple on-site Hubbard repulsion, as 
exemplified in Bolech et al. (2003), where nearest neighbor interactions were considered.


3. Wilson’s numerical renormalization group

Over the past ten years, Wilson’s numerical renor-malization group (NRG) (Krishnamurthy et al., 
1980a,b; Wilson, 1975) has become a major computational tool to study quantum impurity problems. 
Its advantages are that it is (i) non-perturbative, (ii) can handle exponen-tially small energy 
scales with unprecedented accuracy and (iii) does not suffer from any principle limitations 
regarding the parameter space of the model. In addition, through the inspection of the flow of the 
spectrum of the Hamiltonian under the renormalization group transfor-mation, the method provides 
direct very detailed infor-mation about the structure of the low-energy spectrum. Originally, its 
application was limited to static quan-tities (Krishnamurthy et al., 1980a,b; Wilson, 1975), but 
the calculation of dynamical properties is also possible (for a comprehensive overview of the early 
work see e.g. Hewson, 1993) and thus its application to the DMFT impurity problem (Sakai and 
Kuramoto, 1994; Shimizu and Sakai, 1995).  The direct calcu-lation of the one-particle self-energy 
from the NRG (Bulla et al., 1998) triggered a variety of applications within the DMFT framework 
(Bulla, 1999; Bulla et al., 2001; Pruschke et al., 2000; Pruschke and Zitzler, 2003; Zitzler et 
al., 2002, 2003) at both T = 0 and finite tem-
peratures.











Figure 11 Schematic setup of the NRG. The energy axis is partitioned into exponentially decreasing 
intervals.
tion G¯ to close the self-consistency loop.

The Hilbert space of the resulting Hamiltonian in-creases exponentially with the cluster size Nc 
and the
Given this tremendous success, the obvious question is if one can extend the NRG to become useful 
for quan-



tum cluster problems. Let us therefore briefly repeat the basic steps in the NRG scheme. The 
procedure starts by picking a number Λ > 1 and an interval on the energy axis that contains the 
support of the density of states of the bath degrees of freedom. As depicted in Fig. 11 this 
interval is then partitioned into exponentially decreas-ing intervals ]Λ−⁽ⁿ⁺¹⁾, Λ−ⁿ] for Q > 0 with 
n = 0, 1, . . .; likewise for Q < 0. Within each interval, a Fourier decom-position of the bath 
operators is performed; the funda-mental approximation of the NRG consists of neglecting all 
Fourier components except for the homogeneous one. After tri-diagonalization, the resulting 
Hamiltonian reads
34
temperature scales  √Λ−N . This exponential decrease of successive energy scales explains why the 
NRG is suit-able for studies of problems with extremely small dynam-ical energy scales. This 
however comes at the price of a loss of accuracy in high energy features (Hewson, 1993). Up to now 
the discussion was restricted to spin degen-eracy only. However, it is obvious that additional 
degrees of freedom do not influence the general lines of argument. In fact, for a problem with L  1 
internal degrees of free-dom in addition to the spin (like cluster sites or several
orbitals per site), the result (179) acquires the form
HQI ≈ HImp +                   (181)
H  ≈ H  +                  (179)
Σ Σ                    + Σ Σ Σ εˡ a† a  + tˡ  a†  a  + h.c. 
 	 	  
 


where HImp denotes the Hamiltonian of the “impurity”
and the operators a⁽†⁾ represent the bath degrees of freedom. Note that the Hamiltonian (179) 
represents a semi-infinite chain with the impurity at its left end. Wilson  (1975) showed tha t the 
quantities tn ∝ Λ−ⁿ/². If t¯n =  Λntn and ε¯n =  Λnεn, one can cast the Hamil-
where HImp is again of arbitrary structure. Likewise,
the recurrency relation (180) can be set up and the al-gorithm extended. However, a simple example 
demon-strates that for L > 1 the technique can easily become useless. For a typical application to 
the single impu-rity Anderson model (SIAM) one chooses a Λ = 2 and NNRG = 1000. This is sufficient 
to obtain very accu-

tonian into a recurrency form
¯     √  ¯        †
N +1σ
σ


aN +1σ

(180)
rate results for all relevant physical quantities. Let us now consider the next step, i.e. an 
orbitally degenerate problem with L = 2. Without coupling between the or-bitals, this corresponds 
to two independent SIAM we try

¯ †
Nσ N +1σ
σ
+ h.c. .
to solve in a single calculation. Obviously, to obtain the same accuracy as in the true single 
impurity case, one needs at least NNRG = 1000² or Λ = 2² (for a more de-

Given the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H¯N , H¯N +1 can be constructed straightforwardly. Since 
at each of these steps the dimension of the Hilbert space increases by a factor of four, the 
practical use would be limited even
more severely as conventional exact diagonalization, be-cause the construction of H¯N +1 requires 
the knowledge of the whole set of eigenvectors and eigen values of H¯N . However, the 
multiplication of H¯N with Λ > 1 expands the bandwidth of the spectrum and, because t¯N = O(1), the 
low energy properties of H¯N +1 are determined by a restricted set of low-lying states of H¯N only. 
This obser-
vation is put into a practical computational scheme by
the following algorithm: (i) At step N  0 (N = 0 cor-responds to HImp), diagonalize H¯N and 
calculate all in-teresting local properties for that particular chain length.
(ii) Use a suitable number NNRG of the lowest eigenstates of H¯N to construct the next Hamiltonian 
H¯N +1 accord-ing to (180). (iii) Continue with (i) until the desired
accuracy for the ground state is reached. Note that step
(ii) ensures that, no matter how long the chain becomes, the dimension of the Hamilton matrix to 
diagonalize can be fixed to a manageable number.
As was discussed extensively in the literature (Hewson, 1993; Krishnamurthy et al., 1980a,b; 
Wilson, 1975), the knowledge of the local properties at chain length N pro-vides a means to 
calculate physical interesting quantities (thermodynamics and dynamics) at energy respectively
tailed discussion of the issue of the accuracy of the NRG see Paula et al. (1999) and references 
therein).
While NNRG = 1000² is beyond all numerical pos-sibilities, a strongly increasing Λ introduces a 
huge loss in accuracy, both at high and low energies (Oliveira and Oliveira, 1994).  As long as L = 
2 the problem can be partially compensated by respecting the additional symmetries in the system 
(Sakai et al., 1989) or other numerical tricks (Oliveira and Oliveira, 1994). However, as a generic 
tool to solve the effective quantum cluster problem arising in embedded cluster techniques much 
larger values of L must be accessible. Thus, while for a study of qualitative effects of non-local 
correlations with Nc = 2 the NRG is still applicable (see results in section IV.D.1), the preceding 
discussion makes it clear that already for Nc = 4 the method is currently not fea-sible.


IV. APPLICATIONS TO STRONGLY CORRELATED MODELS

In this section we review the application of various quantum cluster approaches to a selection of 
standard models of strongly correlated electron systems. We put special emphasis on the 
capabilities and advantages of these techniques over both finite system simulations and

35


DMFT. In Sec. IV.A we show that quantum cluster ap-proaches are complementary to FSS, i.e. that 
taken to-gether the information obtained from both techniques can yield conclusive results. The 
effects of non-local cor-relations on single- and two-particle spectra as well as phase diagrams 
are emphasized throughout the discus-sions of the Falicov-Kimball model in Sec. IV.B, the 1D 
Hubbard model in Sec. IV.C and the 2D Hubbard model in Sec. IV.D. Due to space restrictions we have 
to omit recent applications of the CPT and DCA to electron-phonon systems and refer the reader to 
the articles by Hohenadler et al. (2003) and Hague (2003), respectively.
0.0


−0.1


−0.2


−0.3


−0.4









Nc=16, FSS Nc=36 Nc=64 Nc=16, DCA Nc=36 Nc=64



A. Complementarity of finite size and quantum cluster simulations

FSS and quantum cluster approaches yield exact solu-tions in the infinite cluster size limit. At 
finite cluster size Nc quantum cluster approaches differ from FSS by the coupling to a 
self-consistent dynamic host. At cluster size Nc = 1 this difference is most pronounced: While FSS 
reduce to the atomic limit, quantum cluster approaches reduce to the DMFT, i.e. a highly 
non-trivial approxi-mation to the infinite size lattice. Thus it is instructive to compare quantum 
cluster results with those obtained from FSS systematically as a function of cluster size.
−0.5
0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1
τ/β

Figure 12 The imaginary time Green function G(k, τ ) at k = (π, 0) in the half-filled 2D Hubbard 
model, cal-culated with finite size QMC (filled symbols) and DCA (empty symbols) when U = 4.4t and 
β = 4/t.  Taken from Moukouri and Jarrell (2001). See also Aryanpour et al. (2003a).

-0.32

-0.34

This has been done in the half-filled 2D Hubbard model using the DCA/QMC algorithm, i.e. DCA 
combined with QMC as a cluster solver, by Huscroft et al. (2001) and Moukouri and Jarrell (2001) 
and with DCA/FLEX by Aryanpour et al. (2003a).
-0.36

-0.38

-0.4
finite size DCA

In the 2D Hubbard model at half-filling, the antiferro-magnetic correlation length ζ increases with 
decreasing temperature and diverges at T = 0. In FSS, i.e. in a finite size lattice with periodic 
boundary conditions, the system freezes when the correlation length exceeds the system size and a 
gap to excitations opens. As the system size is increased this tendency is reduced. Corre-lation 
induced gaps are thus generally overestimated in FSS for smaller clusters since the system is 
artificially closer to criticality. In contrast, in quantum cluster ap-proaches the system is in 
the thermodynamic limit with correlations restricted to the cluster size. Hence the sys-tem never 
freezes. As the cluster size is increased, longer ranged correlations are progressively included. 
The ef-fects of correlations therefore increase with cluster size.
This behavior is illustrated in Fig. 12, where we reproduce the results obtained from DCA/QMC and 
FSS/QMC simulations for the imaginary time Green function G(k, τ ) at the Fermi wave-vector k = (π, 
0) for different cluster sizes Nc. This quantity has a more rapid decay from its maximum at τ = β/2 
when correla-tion effects are stronger so the gap is more pronounced. With increasing cluster size, 
the DCA and FSS results for G(k, τ ) converge from opposite directions. Consistent with the 
expectation that correlation effects are overesti-mated in FSS but underestimated in the DCA, the 
decay
0  0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02
1/L²
Figure 13 The imaginary time Green function G(k, τ ) at k = (π, 0), τ = β/2 in the half-filled 2D 
Hubbard model, calculated with FSS/FLEX (circles) and DCA/FLEX (squares) when U = 1.57t for various 
cluster sizes Nc = L L). Both methods scale as 1/L² and converge to a single value as L   . Taken 
from Aryanpour et al. (2003a).


is stronger for smaller system sizes in FSS, while the DCA results show the opposite behavior. 
Since the two tech-niques become identical in the infinite cluster size limit, the exact G(k, τ ) 
curve is bracketed by the FSS and DCA curves. For methods like the FLEX (see Sec. III.B.2) for 
which calculations with much larger clusters are feasi-ble, scaling of the results to the infinite 
system is possi-ble (see Fig. 13). The extrapolations of FSS/FLEX and DCA/FLEX to the infinite 
system (1/L²  0) coincide within numerical uncertainties, thus allowing the deter-mination of the 
infinite lattice result with unprecedented accuracy.
This complementarity is also seen in results for the spectral gap in the 2D half-filled Hubbard 
model (see Huscroft et al., 2001 and Aryanpour et al., 2003a). In

36


the DCA the gaps converge from small to large as the cluster size increases, while the converse 
occurs in FSS. Although we have only shown results of the DCA, we ex-pect the CDMFT to show similar 
size dependence, since DCA and CDMFT share the same nature of the approx-imation (see discussion in 
Sec. II.C). Results obtained with the CPT algorithm however can be viewed to some extent as a 
periodic continuation of FSS. Thus it is an open question if the CPT method shows similar 
comple-mentarity.

B. 2D Falicov-Kimball model

The usefulness of the discussed cluster theories was first demonstrated by the application of the 
DCA to the 2D FKM by Hettler et al. (2000, 1998). While the FKM is a particularly gentle test bed 
for novel approaches, it allows the study of the effects of non-local fluctuations.
The FKM can be considered as a simplified Hubbard model in which one spin species has zero hopping 
ampli-tude. The Hamiltonian reads
H = −t Σ d†d + U Σ(nᵈ − 1 )(nᶠ − 1 ) ,  (182)
within the DCA by a combination of QMC methods and exact enumeration for small clusters. Since the 
DMFT is a single-site theory (Nc = 1), it yields an unphysical temperature-independent DOS of the 
mobile d-electrons (Brandt and Mielsch, 1989) due to the constraint of half filling (one electron 
per site of either the d or f vari-ety). In a cluster theory with Nc > 1 this artifact is absent, 
since a redistribution of Boltzmann weight with temperature is possible among the various 
configurations of d or f electrons on the cluster sites, while maintain-ing the condition of half 
filling on average. This tem-perature dependence is demonstrated in Fig. 14, where a pseudogap 
develops in the local DOS with decreasing temperature. This pseudogap can be interpreted as a 
precursor of the eventual transition to a CDW phase, which features a full gap at the Fermi level. 
In addition to the gap, there is fine structure in the DOS, related to an exchange energy Jₑff . 
This is better observed in the momentum resolved spectral function (see Hettler et al., 2000; Laad 
and van den Bossche, 2000).
As stated above, the FKM has an instability to a phase with CDW order. As discussed in Sec. I.B, 
embedded cluster theories exhibit phase transitions at some tem-
perature that, due to their residual mean-field charac-

i j
<i,j>
ⁱ  2  ⁱ  2
i
ter, lies above the exact Tc of the infinite system. As the cluster size increases, one expects the 
effect of the

with nᵈ = d†d and nᶠ = f †f
. For a 2D square lattice
mean-field to decrease, leading to a decreasing Tc with
i   i i     i   i  i

the bandwidth of the noninteracting system is W = 8t. At half filling and D  2 the system has a 
second or-der phase transition from a homogeneous high tempera-ture phase to a charge density wave 
with ordering vec-tor Q = (π, π) for any nonzero U (Brandt and Schmidt, 1986, 1987).  The 
universality class is that of the 2D Ising model, the strong coupling limit U/t   1 of the FKM. In 
Hettler et al. (2000) the FKM was evaluated
0.20
U=4 Nc=16
0.15


0.10

T=1
increasing cluster size. The Nc dependence of the tran-
sition temperature Tc is shown in Fig. 15, together with a comparison with the Tc obtained from FSS 
methods (de Vries et al., 1993a,b, 1994) and Tc of the 2D Ising model with exchange coupling J = 
1/(2U ).The extrap-olated cluster results agree with the FSS estimates and, for large values of U , 
also with the results obtained from the 2D Ising model. For smaller U however, charge fluc-tuations 
begin to play a larger role, suppressing the Tc compared to that of the Ising model which lacks 
charge fluctuations.
The effect of different boundary conditions in the DCA cluster is illustrated in the inset⁵. In 
small clusters the effect is strong, but already in a 6  6- cluster the bulk of the cluster 
dominates and the boundaries play a minor role.
When Nc = 1 only charge fluctuations with an en-ergy scale U are present. In a cluster theory the 
non-

0.05
T=1/2
T=1/3 T=1/4 T=1/5
local “spin” fluctuations with an effective energy scale Jₑff (  1/2U for large U ) must also be 
observable in thermodynamic quantities like the entropy and the spe-

0.00
−6   −4   −2   0   2   4   6
Frequency ω

Figure 14 DOS of the 2D FKM for a 4 × 4–cluster at vari-
cific heat. In Hettler et al. (2000) the entropy and spe-cific heat was computed from the total 
energy of the cluster via a maximum-entropy method (Huscroft et al., 2000). For better comparison, 
the calculations were per-
ous temperatures calculated with DCA. The DOS develops    
a pseudogap as the temperature approaches Tc   0.189t (U = 4t) due to the non-local CDW 
fluctuations present in

the DCA (Nc > 1). In the DMFT (Nc = 1), there is no T – dependence of the DOS above Tc. Figure from 
Hettler et al. (2000).
5 According to the derivation of the DCA formalism (see Secs. II.A,
II.B and Fig. 3) the DCA cluster has periodic boundary condi-tions. By shifting the set of cluster 
K-points however, different boundary conditions can be simulated.

37


0.35

0.3

0.25

U= 8 U=12 U=16
Ising
de Vries


0.2

0.15

0.1

U=8





APBC PBC
Ave

2
3           1.5

1

0.5
2

0.2

0.15

0.1
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
1/L

0
0.01   0.10   1.00  10.00
T

1                Nc=1, Tc=0.198
Nc=4, Tc=0.114


0.05
0       0.2       0.4       0.6
Inverse Linear Dimension 1/L
Tc(Nc=4)
0


Figure 15 Tc in the 2D FKM as a function of the inverse linear cluster size for U/t = 8, 12, 16 
calculated with DCA. The Ising limit, and FSS estimates of Tc are shown for comparison. The inset 
shows that the influence of the cluster boundary conditions on Tc disappears rapidly with 
increasing cluster size. Figure from Hettler et al. (2000).


formed in the uniform phase, even at temperatures below the CDW ordering Tc by not allowing for the 
symmetry breaking. The results for a 2  2- cluster are shown in Fig. 16, where the ratio of 
specific heat C over the tem-perature T is plotted for the DMFT and the DCA on a
2  2- cluster. The appearance of the a second peak at lower temperature is a clear indication for 
the additional non-local fluctuations present on the cluster. The effect on the entropy is also 
strong, as shown in the inset.


C. 1D Hubbard model

In this section we discuss the application of quantum cluster approaches to the 1D Hubbard model 
(in usual notation)
0.01     0.10     1.00     10.00    100.00
T

Figure 16 Specific heat versus temperature for single site and
2  2- clusters calculated with DCA and exact enumeration when U = 8t. For Nc = 1, there is a single 
peak with in-tegrated weight ln(2) associated with the suppression of lo-cal charge fluctuations. 
For Nc = 4, there is an additional peak at lower temperatures associated with critical 
fluctua-tions near the charge ordering transition temperature. Tc for Nc = 4 is indicated by an 
arrow. In the inset the entropy
S(T ) =  T dT ′ C⁽T′) is shown in units of ln(2). Figure from
Hettler et al. (2000).


the results with those obtained from the DMFT and DMRG approaches. As an example of this study we 
show in Fig. 17 a comparison of the exact result with that ob-tained from DMFT (referred to as LISA 
for “Local Im-purity Self-consistent Approximation”) and CDMFT for the single-particle spectral gap 
∆(U ) as a function of the on-site Coulomb repulsion U in the half-filled case. The total number of 
sites in the effective cluster model in-cluding cluster and bath sites was fixed to six in the ED 
approach (see Sec. III.C.2).


†
i+1σ
i,σ
ciσ
+ h.c.) + U  ni†ni↓ ,  (183)
i


which provides a non-trivial test ground for these tech-niques. In 1D quantum fluctuations are 
stronger than in higher dimensions. Hence quantum cluster approaches which cut off correlations 
beyond the length-scale set by the cluster size are expected to be less efficient than in higher 
dimensions. Therefore if quantum cluster ap-proaches accurately describe the physics in 1D, they 
are highly likely to capture the physics in 2D and 3D. In addition, since the exact ground-state of 
the 1D Hub-bard model is known from the Bethe ansatz solution (Lieb and Wu, 1968), a quantitative 
comparison of cer-tain static quantities is possible. Fairly reliable results for dynamical 
quantities can be obtained from the den-sity matrix renormalization method.
Bolech et al. (2003) applied the CDMFT/ED method to the 1D Hubbard model and systematically 
compared













Figure 17 Spectral gap in the half-filled 1D Hubbard model as a function of U/t calculated with 
DMFT (LISA) and CDMFT for a 2-site cluster, Nc = 2 compared to the exact result. Taken from Bolech 
et al. (2003).

38


The behavior of the cluster results (CDMFT for Nc = 2) is fundamentally different from the 
single-impurity re-sult (LISA, Nc = 1): When Nc = 1, the spectral gap is reduced to values much 
smaller than the exact value and even vanishes at finite U . The existence of this Mott-transition 
in 1D for Nc = 1 is a well known artifact of the DMFT method, reflecting the physics of infinite 
dimensions where the Mott-transition is indeed present (Georges et al., 1996). In contrast, the Nc 
= 2 result follows the exact result quite accurately yielding an in-sulating solution for all 
finite values of U > 0 in agree-ment with the well known physics of the 1D model. This excellent 
reproduction of the exact gap for Nc = 2 is quite encouraging since larger cluster sizes should 
pro-duce even better results. And indeed, a comparison of the nearest neighbor Green function with 
DMRG results shows systematic improvements with increasing cluster size (Bolech et al., 2003).
A related fundamental feature in 1D correlated sys-tems is the breakdown of the Fermi-liquid 
picture be-cause of spin-charge separation as described in the con-cept of Luttinger-liquids (see 
e.g. Voit, 1994). In a Fermi-liquid, the spectral weight A(k, ω) is centered around a single 
quasiparticle peak at ω = Qk, while in a Luttinger-liquid, A(k, ω) is distributed between two 
singularities associated respectively with spin- and charge-excitations (spinons and holons). 
S´en´echal et al. (2000) have calcu-lated A(k, ω) in the 1D Hubbard model using the CPT formalism. 
Fig. 18 shows a comparison of this quantity at the Fermi wave-vector k = π/2 as calculated by 
ordi-nary ED and its infinite lattice extension within the CPT method for various cluster sizes N 
when U = 8t (bottom) and U = 16t (top).


















Figure 18 The spectral function A(k, ω) at k = π/2 in the half-filled 1D Hubbard model when U = 16t 
(top) and U = 8t (bottom), calculated with ordinary ED and with CPT for cluster sizes N = 4, 8, 12. 
Taken from S´en´echal et al. (2000).

While no sign of spin-charge separation is seen in the pure ED results, the CPT method reveals the 
two
branches of the spectral weight indicative of spin-charge separation. The two-peak structure 
resolves more clearly as the cluster size increases. Since propagation between clusters requires 
the spinon and holon to recombine, spin-charge separation can only exist on length- and time-scales 
limited by the cluster size. Consequently it takes fairly large clusters to clearly resolve this 
feature.


















Figure 19 The spectral function A(k, ω) in the half-filled 1D Hubbard model when U = 4t, calculated 
with CPT for Nc =
12. Taken from (S´en´echal et al., 2000).




The analysis of the k-dependent spectral function in Fig. 19 reveals the dispersion of the two 
branches. The spinon- and holon-branches show different dispersions and can be clearly identified 
together with the gap at the chemical potential at k = π/2. These T = 0 simu-lations were extended 
to finite low temperatures T > 0 by Aichhorn et al. (2003) who implemented a novel low-temperature 
Lanzcos algorithm which connects the ex-act ground-state Lanczos method with the established 
fi-nite temperature Lanzcos method (Jakliˇc and Prelovˇsek, 2000). They showed that the spin-charge 
separation ob-served in the T = 0 results persists at finite, low temper-atures.

As exemplified by these studies, quantum cluster ap-proaches have been proven very useful to 
explore the complex behavior of the 1D Hubbard model. Even stud-ies with small cluster sizes are 
consistent with well-known results such as the opening of a Mott gap at half-filling for all U > 0 
and the existence of spin-charge separation reflected in the two branches in the electronic 
dispersion. This success in the 1D case shows great promise for ap-plications of cluster methods in 
2D or 3D where cluster methods are expected to be even more efficient since cor-relations are less 
pronounced.

39


D. 2D Hubbard model

The interest in the 2D Hubbard model (in usual nota-tion)
antiferromagnetic ordering at T = 0 is merely the result of the Mott-transition at higher 
temperatures.
Different scenarios however exist for the weak-coupling regime (U  W ): In the weak coupling point 
of view, a spin density wave forms at T = 0 due to the nesting of the

†
iσ
ij,σ
jσ + U  ni†ni↓   (184)
i
Fermi surface and leads to the doubling of the unit cell. Hence the gap in the spectrum is a direct 
consequence of the antiferromagnetism at T = 0. This perturbative

has been revived recently in particular since it is believed to capture the physics of the 
superconducting planes in high-temperature superconductors (HTSC) (Anderson, 1997b; Zhang and Rice, 
1988, 1990). This section re-views various applications of quantum cluster approaches to the 2D 
Hubbard model at half-filling and at finite dop-ing, including results for a possible Mott-Hubbard 
tran-sition, antiferromagnetism and its precursors, pseudogap phenomena and superconductivity.


1. Metal-insulator transition

The study of a possible metal-insulator transition (MIT) in the 2D Hubbard model at half-filling 
(Qₒ = tii =  U/2) is under active research. This problem was studied in the unfrustrated model, 
i.e. with only nearest neighbor hopping tij = Qₒδij  tδ₍ij⟩ within DCA/QMC by Moukouri and Jarrell 
(2001) and with the two-site composite operator method (see Sec. II.H) by Stanescu and Phillips 
(2001). The frustrated case (addi-tional next-nearest neighbor hopping t′δ₍₍ij⟩⟩) was inves-tigated 
by Parcollet et al. (2003).
Numerical calculations have shown that the ground state of the unfrustrated model is an 
antiferromagnetic insulator with the N´eel temperature TN = 0 constrained by the Mermin-Wagner 
theorem. A spectral gap hence exists at T = 0. However the central question about the origin of the 
gap and its relation to antiferromagnetic or-dering is less understood. Is the gap a direct 
consequence of the antiferromagnetic ordering at T = 0 or does it arise from strong correlations at 
higher temperatures?
To appreciate the significance of this issue it is impor-tant to understand the fundamental 
difference between antiferromagnetic insulators, i.e. insulators due to mag-netic ordering and Mott 
insulators, i.e. insulators due to electronic correlations. Antiferromagnetic insulators re-sult 
from the doubling of the unit cell in the ordered state and are therefore adiabatically connected 
to band insu-lators which have an even number of electrons per unit cell. In contrast, paramagnetic 
Mott insulators have an odd number of electrons per unit cell and are therefore fundamentally 
different from band insulators.
At strong coupling (U  W ) the situation is well un-derstood: A charge gap of order U develops in 
the spec-trum below temperatures T  U due entirely to strong electronic correlations. The spins are 
coupled by the ex-change interaction J = 4t²/U and govern the low-energy physics. As a result spin 
and charge are separated. Sys-tems in this regime are hence Mott insulators and the
point of view is referred to as Slater mechanism. It is in contrast to the second opinion due to 
Anderson (1997a,b) who has argued that the 2D half-filled Hubbard model is always in the 
strong-coupling regime, so that a Mott gap is present for all U > 0 as in 1D (see Sec. IV.C). As 
the temperature decreases, local moments develop because of the opening of the Mott gap which then 
order at T = 0. Thus the antiferromagnet at T = 0 is a consequence of the Mott transition.
The MIT in the half-filled Hubbard model has been extensively studied within the DMFT (for a review 
see Georges et al., 1996). In the DMFT one can easily dis-entangle the effects leading to 
antiferromagnetic and Mott gaps.  The DMFT equations for the paramag-netic state of the bipartite 
Bethe lattice are identical with the equations of the fully frustrated infinite dimen-sional model 
(Georges et al., 1996).  This justifies the study of the paramagnetic solution within the 
antifer-romagnetic phase of the unfrustrated model which shows a first order Mott MIT ending at a 
finite temperature critical point (Georges et al., 1996). Although this justi-fication does not 
hold for Nc > 1, one can still study the paramagnetic solution by enforcing the spin sym-metry and 
hence avoiding the opening of a full spectral gap due entirely to magnetic ordering. Following this 
approach, Moukouri and Jarrell (2001) studied the MIT in the unfrustrated 2D half-filled Hubbard 
model using DCA/QMC systematically as a function of cluster size Nc. The MIT can be identified by 
analyzing the behav-ior of the double occupancy D = n†n↓ . This quantity is shown in Fig. 20 for 
different values of the Coulomb repulsion U and cluster size Nc.
When Nc = 1 the double occupancy displays evidence for a MIT when U is of the order of the 
bandwidth W = 8t = 2:  D  is monotonically increasing with temperature when U = 3, but displays a 
minimum for U = 0.5 and 1 indicating the emergence of quasiparti-cle states at the chemical 
potential at low temperatures. When Nc > 1 the situation is radically different: In the strong 
coupling regime (U = 3), local fluctuations dom-inate and D is essentially independent of Nc except 
at very low temperatures. In contrast, in the weak coupling regime, the minimum found for Nc = 1 
flattens progres-sively as Nc increases from 8 to 16. When Nc  36 a downturn in D appears at low 
temperatures. By open-ing a gap and hence localizing the moments, the system can gain free energy 
by taking advantage of the short-ranged magnetic correlations.
The results for the DOS shown in Fig. 21 support the evidence from the double occupancy.  The 
quasi-

40


0.25


0.2


0.15


0.1


0.05










Nc=1 Nc=8 Nc=16 Nc=36 Nc=64


U=0.5 U=1




U=3




ky
K
Mπ
k’
k

M0
kₓ




1. BZ



0
0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1
T

Figure 20 Double occupancy as a function of temperature for different values of U in the 
half-filled 2D Hubbard model calculated with DCA/QMC for various cluster sizes Nc. Here, t = 0.25, 
so the lines for U = 0.5, 1, 2 correspond to U/t = 2, 4, 12. Taken from Moukouri and Jarrell 
(2001).
Figure 22 Tiling of the first Brillouin zone for Nc = 2.


The appropriate tiling of the Brillouin zone is shown in Fig. 22 and the resulting coarse-grained 
spectral func-tions A¯(K, w) =   ¹ mG¯(K, w) for the two cluster K-
points are shown in Fig. 23. Even for small values of U


0.8
0.4
0
0.8
0.4
0
0.8
0.4
0
0.8
0.4
0

Nc=1


Nc=16



Nc=36


Nc=64


−3    −2    −1    0    1    2    3
ω














Figure 23 DCA coarse-grained spectral functions for different

Figure 21 DOS when U/t = 4 for different temperatures in
the half-filled 2D Hubbard model calculated with DCA/QMC for various cluster sizes Nc. Taken from 
Moukouri and Jarrell (2001).


particle Kondo-like resonance at the chemical potential for Nc = 1 is destroyed by non-local 
correlations when Nc > 1. As Nc increases, a gap opens at the chemical potential and the Hubbard 
sidebands become more pro-nounced consistent with the suppression of D . Given the fact that DCA 
always underestimates correlation in-duced spectral gaps (see Sec. IV.A), these simulations 
indicate the absence of a weak-coupling regime in the unfrustrated 2D Hubbard model at half-filling 
consistent with Anderson’s point of view.
Another interesting aspect is whether this result changes at zero temperature, T = 0 and the MIT 
pre-dicted by DMFT returns. As evidence that even at
T = 0 one must expect a gap in the spectra for any
U > 0, we show here first DCA results at T = 0 ob-tained with Wilson’s NRG for a cluster size of Nc 
= 2.
values of U obtained from Nc = 2 DCA/NRG calculations at T = 0. Apparently, no finite critical 
value of U for a conven-tional Mott-Hubbard transition seems to exist. In contrast, for all U > 0 a 
gap exists at the Fermi energy.

a well defined gap exists in the spectrum at the Fermi energy. Note that all calculations were done 
in the para-magnetic phase, i.e. the concept of a Slater insulator does not apply here. The gap 
quickly increases with increasing U and at the same time the system gains more spectral weight in 
the incoherent parts of the spectrum, i.e. begins to resemble what one expects from Mott localized 
states. The DCA results were confirmed in a similar cluster study by Stanescu and Phillips (2001) 
using the two-site composite operator method discussed in Sec. II.H. Figure 24 shows the results of 
this study for the temperature de-pendence of the value of the DOS at the chemical poten-tial, ρ(0) 
in the 1D and 2D models for small U = 2t. As a consequence of the shape of the non-interacting DOS, 
the 2D result for ρ(0) is enhanced over the 1D result. However, in both 1D and 2D, ρ(0) falls to 
zero as the temperature decreases indicating the absence of a metal-



0.2
2D
0.15


0.1


0.05


0







1D




U = 2t
41

2D Hubbard model (S´en´echal and Tremblay, 2003) for t′ =  0.4t. Although not the focus of this 
study, the results show further evidence of a Mott transition at a finite value of U in the filling 
dependence of the chemical potential.
The existence of the Mott transition in the frustrated Hubbard model and its absence in the 
unfrustrated model seems to indicate that antiferromagnetic correlations play a key role in the 
opening of a Mott gap at weak coupling. Since the opening of the gap occurs in the paramagnetic 
solution, it cannot be attributed to the existence of an-

0    0.5    1    1.5    2
T / t
Figure 24 DOS as a function of temperature at the chemical potential in the 1D and 2D half-filled 
Hubbard model when U = 2t calculated with a two-site composite operator approx-imation. Taken from 
Stanescu and Phillips (2001).


lic state at half-filling even for small U .
To elucidate the role of antiferromagnetic correlations in the opening of the Mott gap, the 
frustrated Hub-bard model may be studied. In the t-t′ Hubbard model, a next-nearest neighbor 
hopping t′ between sub-lattices strongly frustrates antiferromagnetic correlations. This model was 
studied by Parcollet et al. (2003) for t′ = t on a 2  2 cluster using CDMFT/QMC. We reproduce their 
results for the U dependence of the double occupancy dₒcc = 1/4  ⁴  ni†ni↓ for different 
temperatures in Fig. 25. Similar to the behavior found in DMFT, dₒcc displays a downturn at a 
critical value Uc, indicating a transition from a metallic to an insulating state. An in-spection 
of the spectral weight A(k, 0) at the chemical potential reveals that the gap opens first in the 
region around k = (π, 0) (Parcollet et al., 2003). These results

















Figure 25 Double occupancy as a function of U in the frus-trated 2D Hubbard model with t′ = t for 
different tempera-tures (from top to bottom) T/t = 1/5, 4/30, 1/10, 1/11, calcu-lated with 
CDMFT/QMC. Taken from Parcollet et al. (2003).

were substantiated by a CPT study of the frustrated
tiferromagnetic ordering. Thus the conclusion reached from these cluster studies is that a 
symbiosis of local mo-ment formation and short-ranged antiferromagnetic cor-relations cause the gap 
to open at finite temperatures (Moukouri and Jarrell, 2001).


2. Antiferromagnetism and precursors

If the simulations are performed without enforcing the spin symmetry or frustrating the lattice, 
the system is given the possibility to transform to a state with antifer-romagnetic order. Since 
the system is two-dimensional, we know from the Mermin-Wagner theorem that the true N´eel 
temperature TN is necessarily zero. As found in in-finite dimensions (Jarrell et al., 1993), the 
DMFT pre-dicts a finite temperature transition even in 2D due to its mean-field character. As 
discussed in Sec. I.B, clus-ter approaches restore non-local fluctuations and thus are expected to 
drive the N´eel temperature systematically to zero as the cluster size increases.
As discussed in Secs. II.F and II.E, phase transitions can be identified from the disordered (here: 
paramag-netic) state by calculating the corresponding susceptibil-ity, or from the ordered state by 
computing the order parameter. The calculation of order parameters is exem-plified in Fig. 26 where 
we plot the DCA/NCA result for the sub-lattice magnetization m = 1/N  i,σ eⁱQ·ˣi σniσ (see Eq. 
(110)) as a function of the reduced temperature t = T/TN in the 2D half-filled Hubbard model for 
the cluster sizes Nc = 1 and Nc = 4 when U = 4t. The Nc = 4 N´eel temperature TN = 0.208t is 
reduced from the Nc = 1 result TN = 0.304t and the order parame-ter is strongly suppressed. As 
expected, non-local spin fluctuations suppress antiferromagnetism.
Figure 27 shows the DCA/QMC result for the temper-ature dependence of the inverse antiferromagnetic 
sus-ceptibility 1/χAF at U = 6t for various cluster sizes Nc in the paramagnetic state.  At high 
temperatures the susceptibility is independent of Nc due to the lack of non-local fluctuations. In 
contrast to FSS, the low tem-perature susceptibility diverges at T = TN indicating the instability 
to the antiferromagnetic state. When Nc = 1 the susceptibility diverges with a critical exponent γ  
1 as expected for a mean-field theory. Consistent with the NCA results the susceptibility diverges 
at lower temper-atures when Nc > 1 with larger exponents indicative of

42

















Figure 26 Sublattice magnetization as a function of temper-ature in the half-filled 2D Hubbard 
model calculated with DCA/NCA for cluster sizes Nc = 1, 4 when U = 4t. Inset: Ne´el-temperature 
versus doping. Taken from Maier (2001).


fluctuation effects. However as discussed in Sec. I.B these critical exponents reflect the behavior 
at intermediate temperatures. Very close to the transition, there must a region of mean-field 
behavior. However, this region is very difficult to resolve with DCA/QMC, due to numer-ical noise, 
which is especially large near the transition.
tuations which are responsible for suppressing the an-tiferromagnetism result in precursers of the 
antiferro-magnetic phase transition. The onset of antiferromag-netic correlations on short time- 
and length-scales may be signaled by a pseudogap in the DOS as a precur-sor to the 
antiferromagnetic gap. This was predicted by Kampf and Schrieffer (1990) using a phenomeno-logical 
ansatz for the weak coupling Hubbard model based on the presence of strong antiferromagnetic 
spin-fluctuations. On a microscopic level, this question has been addressed by FSS/QMC in the 2D 
Hubbard model in Vekic and White (1993) and Creffield et al. (1995) and by approximate many-body 
techniques in Deisz et al. (1996) and Moukouri et al. (1999). But the results have been 
inconclusive as to the existence of a pseudogap at low temperatures, due to the limitations of 
these tech-niques.
Within quantum cluster approaches the pseudogap phenomenon was first studied by Maier et al. 
(2000b) within the DCA/NCA formalism. In contrast to Nc = 1 where a Kondo-like quasiparticle peak 
emerges at the chemical potential as the temperature is decreased (rem-iniscent of the D =   DMFT 
result (Georges et al., 1996)), a pseudogap was found when non-local correla-tions were included in 
Nc = 4 simulations. For larger


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.050  10 20 30 40
Nc







U=1.5 N=1.00

Nc=1 TN=0.094 γ=1.04 Nc=8 TN=0.087 γ=1.06 Nc=16 TN=0.078 γ=1.08 Nc=18 TN=0.074 γ=1.12 Nc=32 TN=0.073 γ=1.11 
Nc=36 TN=0.068 γ=1.14
00    0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25
T

Figure 27 Inverse antiferromagnetic susceptibility versus tem-perature in the half-filled 2D 
Hubbard model calculated with DCA/QMC for various cluster sizes Nc when U = 6t. The lines are fits 
to the function (T  TN)γ. Inset: Corresponding Ne´el-temperatures as a function of the cluster 
size. Taken from Jarrell et al. (2001b).

As shown in the inset, the transition temperatures fall very slowly with the cluster size Nc, but 
the Nc = 4 falls off the curve. As detailed in Sec. II.C.4, fluctua-tion effects in clusters with 
linear size L = 2 are over-proportionally enhanced since its coordination number is reduced 
compared to the original system. Hence the Nc = 4 result does not fall on the curve, similar to the 
behavior seen in DCA studies of the FKM (Hettler et al., 2000).
The question arises of whether the same non-local fluc-

Figure 28 Spectral function A(k, ω) and the real  eΣ(k, ω) and imaginary  mΣ(k, ω) parts of the 
self-energy for vari-ous temperatures at k = (π, 0) in the 2D half-filled Hubbard model for U = 
5.2t calculated with DCA/QMC for a 64-site cluster (Nc = 64). Taken from Huscroft et al. (2001).

cluster sizes, the emergence of the pseudogap in the DOS was explored by DCA/QMC in Huscroft et al. 
(2001) and DCA/FLEX in Aryanpour et al. (2003a). Figure 28 dis-plays the DCA/QMC results for the 
spectral function A(k, ω) and the self-energy Σ(k, ω) at the Fermi wave-vector k = (π, 0) in the 
paramagnetic state for a 64-site cluster (Nc = 64) at various temperatures. With decreas-ing 
temperature a pseudogap develops in A(k, ω) at the Fermi wave-vector k = (π, 0). Simultaneously the 
slope of ℜeΣ(k, 0) becomes positive at k = (π, 0) signaling

43


the appearance of two new solutions in the quasiparticle equation ω  Qk + µ  eΣ(k, ω) = 0. In 
addition to the strongly damped solution at ω = 0 which is also present in the non-interacting 
system these two new quasiparticle solutions appear on both sides of ω = 0. A consequence of the 
antiferromagnetic order on short time- and length-scales, they can be viewed as precursers of the 
doubling of the unit cell in the antiferromagnetic state. The pseu-dogap is generated by the local 
minimum in  mΣ(k, ω) which signals the breakdown of Fermi-liquid behavior.
By studying the system on a triangular lattice, Imai and Kawakami (2002) investigated the effects 
of frustration on the pseudogap in the half-filled 2D Hub-bard model using the DCA/NCA and DCA/FLEX 
ap-proaches. Figure 29 schematically illustrates the trian-gular lattice and the choice of cluster 
wave-vectors in the corresponding Brillouin zone for Nc = 4.



















Figure 30 The DOS (a) and coarse-grained single-particle
spectral functions A¯(K, ω) in the 2D half-filled√ frustrated
Hubbard mo√del for K = (0, 0) (b), K = (π, π/ 3) (c) and
when U = 6t and T = 0.6t. Taken from Imai and Kawakami (2002).




Figure 29 Illustration of the triangular lattice with hopping amplitudes t and t′ (a) and DCA 
coarse-graining cells (b) in the first Brillouin zone (dashed line) of the triangular lattice when 
Nc = 4. Cluster K-points are indicated by the dots. Taken from Imai and Kawakami (2002).

For t′ = 0 this setup corresponds to the unfrustrated system and the effects of frustration can be 
systemat-ically studied as t′ is increased to its maximal value t′ = t. Figure 30 reproduces the 
results for the DOS
and coarse-grained spectra A¯(K, ω) for different values
of the frustration t′. As the geometrical frustration in-creases from t′ = 0 to t′ = t, 
antiferromagnetic spin fluc-tuations are suppressed. Consequntly the pseudogap in the unfrustrated 
system diminishes and a quasiparticle peak develops at the chemical potential. The change in the 
DOS mainly originates in the region in momentum space around K = (π, π/ 3) where the Fermi surface 
is located. These results are thus consistent with an anti-ferromagnetic spin fluctuation driven 
pseudogap.


3. Pseudogap at finite doping

The properties of the Hubbard model away from half-filling are of great interest especially in the 
context of HTSC. Contrary to Fermi-liquid theory, low-energy spin-
ments. This pseudogap phenomenon⁶ has proven a great challenge for theories of strongly correlated 
systems.
DMFT has provided great insight into the evolution of spectra in doped Mott-insulators. Exact 
results based on the self-consistent mapping onto an Anderson impu-rity model show that the system 
is a Fermi-liquid in the metallic state in the absence of symmetry break-ing below a coherence 
temperature reminiscent of the Kondo-temperature (Georges and Kotliar, 1992). Hence the 
spin-susceptibility becomes finite at low temperatures in contrast to the experimental results in 
underdoped cuprates. Furthermore Mu¨ller-Hartmann (1989a) showed that because the self-energy is 
momentum independent, volume and shape of the Fermi surface are identical to the non-interacting 
Fermi-surface. Thus DMFT does not include the effects that lead to the emergence of a pseu-dogap in 
the spin- and quasiparticle spectrum and cluster extensions are necessary.
Within quantum cluster approaches the pseudogap phenomenon in the doped 2D Hubbard model was 
stud-ied with DCA/NCA in Maier et al. (2000b) and Maier (2001), with DCA/QMC in Jarrell et al. 
(2001a) and Maier et al. (2002a), with the two-site composite opera-tor method in Stanescu and 
Phillips (2003a,b) and with the CPT in S´en´echal and Tremblay (2003).
Figure 31 shows the DCA/NCA result for the low-energy DOS in the 2D Hubbard model at 5% doping (δ = 
0.05) around the chemical potential (ω = 0) cal-
excitations in HTSC are suppressed at low temperatures    
as evidenced by Knight-shift experiments.  Concomi-

tantly, the Fermi surface is gapped along certain direc-tions in the Brillouin zone as indicated in 
ARPES experi-
6 For  a  review  on  the  pseudogap  phenomenon  see Timusk and Statt (1999).



culated on a 4-site cluster (Nc = 4). At high tempera-ture T > 0.3t no pseudogap is seen in the 
DOS. As the temperature is lowered the DOS distorts at the chemi-cal potential and a pseudogap 
emerges at ω = 0 when T . 0.3t.


1


0.8


0.6




δ=0.300
δ=0.200
δ=0.100
δ=0.050




1.5


1


0.5
44


δ=0.0
δ=0.1
δ=0.2
0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4
T
0.4


0.2


0   -1      0      1      2      3
ω
Figure 32 DOS for various dopings δ in the 2D Hubbard model at T = 0.092t and U = 8t calculated 
with DCA/QMC for a 4-site cluster, Nc = 4. Inset: Uniform spin-susceptibility as a function of 
temperature.  Taken from Jarrell et al. (2001a).




Figure 31 DOS for various temperatures in the 2D Hubbard model at 5% doping when U = 12t near the 
chemical potential (ω = 0) calculated with DCA/NCA for a 4-site cluster, Nc =
4. Taken from Maier (2001).

These perturbative results⁷  were  confirmed  in DCA/QMC simulations by Jarrell et al. (2001a) 
which we reproduce in Fig. 32. At low temperatures a pseudo-gap is observed in the DOS at dopings δ 
. 0.2. This de-pression of quasiparticle states at the chemical potential is accompanied by a 
downturn of the uniform magnetic susceptibility shown in the inset. For low to intermediate doping 
it develops a maximum defining a crossover tem-perature T ∗. Below T ∗ quasiparticle and low-energy 
spin excitations are suppressed by non-local correlations sim-ilar to what is observed in the 
experiment. At the same time, the charge susceptibility (not shown) displays qual-itatively 
different behavior forming a strong low-energy peak at low temperatures (see Maier et al., 2004, 
2002a and Fig. 38) which signals the emergence of coherent charge excitations below T ∗. The Nc = 4 
DCA results are thus consistent with a spin-charge separated picture as in Anderson’s RVB theory. 
This is not surprising since, as we discussed in Sec. IV.D.2, fluctuations are enhanced in the Nc = 
4 cluster due to the “too small” coordination number. It is known that small coordination numbers 
favor the spin-charge separated RVB state (Anderson,



7 The NCA is perturbative in the coupling to the host, not in the interaction, as detailed in Sec. 
III.B.3.
1987) over the N´eel state.  Indeed the RVB state was shown to be the ground state of a 2  2 
Heisenberg model with periodic boundary conditions with a large gap to the first excited state 
(Dagotto and Moreo, 1988).




















Figure 33 The spectral function A(k, ω) near the chemical potential in the 2D Hubbard model at T = 
0.088t and U = 8t along high-symmetry directions in the first Brillouin-zone between Γ = (0, 0), X 
= (π, 0) and M = (π, π) calculated with DCA/QMC for a 4-site cluster Nc = 4.

The corresponding 4-site DCA/QMC result for the mo-mentum resolved spectral function A(k, ω) in the 
pseu-dogap regime is displayed in Fig. 33 for energies near the chemical potential between points 
of high symmetry

45


Γ = (0, 0), X = (π, 0) and M = (π, π) in the first Bril-louin zone. The overall dispersion of the 
band crossing the chemical potential ω = 0 follows that of the non-interacting system Qk. While 
coherent quasiparticles ex-ist along Γ  M, the pseudogap is seen near X = (π, 0) at the chemical 
potential ω = 0. The anisotropy of the pseu-dogap is thus consistent with that observed in ARPES 
measurements on underdoped hole-doped cuprates.
Qualitatively similar results for the emergence of the quasiparticle spectrum in the doped 2D 
Hubbard model were obtained by Stanescu and Phillips (2003b) using the two-site composite operator 
approach discussed in Sec. II.H (see also Stanescu and Phillips, 2003a). Figure 34 illustrates 
their results for the doping dependence of the chemical potential µ, the imaginary part of the 
self-energy  mΣ and the U dependence of the low-energy DOS. At half-filling the chemical potential 
has a dis-
discussed above. In electron-doped systems (left side) however, the pseudogap appears at the 
crossing points of the Fermi surface with the antiferromagnetic Brillouin zone boundary at moderate 
interaction U = 4t. When U is large however (not shown), the Fermi surface only sur-vives in the 
neighborhood of (π, 0) and (0, π). As shown in the lower panels of Fig. 35 the pseudogap in both 
cases is generated by a large scattering rate  mΣ(k, 0) at the chemical potential. A unified 
picture of the spectral



8  0
−1
−2

6 −3
−4
−5
−6
4 −7








n = 0.97


n = 0.30






n = 0.80














0.2

−0.5  −0.25   0   0.25  0.5
ω/ t



2


0.15


0.1

U = 4t


U = 8t



0.05 U = 12t


0
−2   −1   0   1   2
ω/ t

Figure 35 Intensity plot of the spectral function A(k, 0) (top) and imaginary part of the 
self-energy ℑmΣ(k, 0) (bottom) of

0.6     0.8     1     1.2     1.4
Filling n
Figure 34 The doping dependence of the chemical potential in the 2D Hubbard model calculated with 
the two-site composite operator method for T = 0.15t (dashed line) and T = 0.07t (solid line). 
Right inset: DOS for various values of U at 5% doping (n = 0.95). Left inset: Imaginary part of the 
self-energy evaluated at a Fermi momentum (0.3,2.10) for n = 0.97, (0.3,1.84) for n = 0.80 and 
(0.3,1.06) for n = 0.3. Taken
from Stanescu and Phillips (2003b).

continuity indicating the absence of mid-gap states. In agreement with DCA/QMC (Jarrell et al., 
2001a,b) and DCA/NCA (Maier, 2001) results,  mΣ is large in the underdoped pseudogap regime (n = 
0.97) and acquires Fermi-liquid behavior at larger doping n  0.80 indicated by the parabolic 
minimum at the chemical potential. As illustrated in the inset, the depth of the pseudogap 
de-creases as U increases suggesting a pseudogap scale com-patible with t²/U .
S´en´echal and Tremblay (2003) recently investigated the difference in pseudogap behavior between 
electron and hole doped HTSC using CPT for the 2D t  t′  t′′ Hubbard model. As illustrated in the 
Fermi-surface plots in Fig. 35, their results at U = 8t demonstrate that the pseudogap in 
hole-doped systems (right side) occurs near X = (π, 0) at optimal doping consistent with the 
results
the 2D Hubbard model calculated with CPT on a 3  4-site cluster. The left side shows the results in 
the first quadrant of the Brillouin zone for the 17% electron-doped system at U = 4t and the right 
side for the 17% hole-doped system at U = 8t. Taken from S´en´echal and Tremblay (2003).

properties of the electron- and hole-doped cuprates thus emerges from these results if the 
interaction strength U is allowed to be doping dependent. To reproduce the experimental 
observations in optimally doped cuprates, large values of U seem necessary in hole-doped (U  8t) 
systems, while smaller values of U describe the electron-doped systems (U . 6t) (S´en´echal and 
Tremblay, 2003).

4. Superconductivity

FSS QMC simulations for the doped 2D Hubbard model in the intermediate coupling regime U  W 
sup-port the idea of a spin-fluctuation driven interaction mediating d-wave superconductivity (for 
a review see Scalapino, 1999). However the fermion sign problem lim-its these calculations to 
temperatures too high to study a possible transition.  These calculations are also re-stricted to 
relatively small system sizes, making state-ments for the thermodynamic limit problematic, and 
in-hibiting studies of the low-energy physics. These short-comings do not apply to embedded cluster 
theories which

46


are built for the thermodynamic limit.  Cluster sizes larger than one are necessary however, to 
describe a pos-sible transition to a state with a non-local (d-wave) order parameter as discussed 
in Sec. II.E.
It is well known from weak coupling FSS FLEX re-sults (Bickers et al., 1989) and phenomenological 
theories (Monthoux et al., 1991; Scalapino, 1999) that antiferro-magnetic spin-fluctuations mediate 
pairing with d-wave symmetry and cause a pseudogap in underdoped systems. In optimally doped 
cuprates, these spin-fluctuations are known to be short-ranged, extending over a few lat-tice 
spacings. Hence quantum cluster approaches should
tude is also reflected in the DOS depicted in the upper left part where the lower subband of the 
full spectrum is shown. It displays the superconducting pseudogap at zero frequency as expected for 
a d-wave order parameter. Jarrell et al. (2001a,b) used DCA/QMC to search for many different types 
of superconductivity, including s-
, extended s-, p- and d-wave, of both even and odd frequency.  Of these, only the odd-frequency 
s-wave and even-frequency d-wave pair-field susceptibilities were strongly enhanced, and only the 
d-wave susceptibility di-verged. This is illustrated in Fig. 37 where the pair-field

provide an adequate methodology to study supercon-ductivity in these systems.  Pairing in the 2D 
Hub-bard model was studied using DCA/NCA by Maier et al. (2000a), and with DCA/QMC by Jarrell et 
al. (2001a,b) and Maier et al. (2004). The possible coexistence of su-perconductivity with 
antiferromagnetic order was inves-
tigated by Lichtenstein and Katsnelson (2000).
2



1.5
even S odd S even D even XS
8


4







δ=0.00 Nc=4
δ=0.00 Nc=1

The results of 4-site (Nc = 4) DCA simulations for    1
δ=0.05 Nc=4
δ=0.05 Nc=1

the doped 2D Hubbard model show an instability to a superconducting phase with a dₓ2 −y2 -wave 
order param-eter at low enough temperatures. As a typical example
of this transition, Fig. 36 shows the DCA/NCA result for the DOS and the coarse-grained anomalous 
Green
0.5
00    0.05    0.1    0.15
T
function G¯12(K, ω) ≡ F¯(K, ω) defined in Eq. (95) at

different cluster K-points near the chemical potential in
00     0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5
the superconducting state.  G¯12(K, ω) vanishes at the                  T
Figure 37 Pair-field susceptibilities versus temperature in the even frequency s-wave, extended 
s-wave (xs), d-dave and odd-frequency s-wave channels in the 2D Hubbard model at 5% doping, U = 8t 
calculated with DCA/QMC for a 4-site clus-ter, Nc = 4. Inset: Inverse d-wave pair-field 
susceptibility ver-sus temperature for different dopings and cluster sizes. The line is a fit to 
b(T  Tc)γ with Tc = 0.084t and γ = 0.72. Taken from Jarrell et al. (2001a).











Figure 36 DOS near the chemical potential (a) and coarse-grained anomalous Green function G¯12(K, 
ω)  F¯(K, ω) for different DCA cells (b-c) in the superconducting state of the
2D Hubbard model at 19% doping, T = 0.047t, U = 12t calculated with DCA/NCA for a 4-site cluster, 
Nc = 4. Taken from Maier et al. (2000a).

cluster K = (0, 0) and (π, π) but is finite at (π, 0) and (0, π) with opposite signs. Since the 
K-dependence of the coarse-grained order parameter ∆¯ K is given by the K-dependence of the 
coarse-grained anomalous Green func-
tion (see Eq. (99)), this result is consistent with a dₓ2−y2 - symmetry of the order parameter. The 
finite pair ampli-

susceptibilities are plotted versus temperature at 5% dop-ing. The behavior of the inverse d-wave 
pair-field suscep-tibility as a function of temperature for Nc = 1 and 4 and δ = 0 and 0.5 is shown 
in the inset. For Nc = 1 there is no tendency towards pairing. As detailed in Sec. II.E, the DMFT 
is not able to describe pairing with symme-tries lower than the lattice symmetry (i.e., p-, d-wave, 
etc.). For Nc = 4 and δ = 0 the inverse susceptibil-ity rises abruptly as the temperature is 
lowered and the Mott gap opens in the DOS. The Mott gap becomes more pronounced as Nc increases 
(see Sec. IV.D.1), so that for larger clusters the gap prevents superconductivity even for U < W . 
If charge excitations are gapped, then pair-ing is suppressed. At half-filling, for U = 8t the gap 
is of order U , and thus much larger than the magnetic exchange energy J  4t²/U = 0.5t. Hence the 
opening of the Mott gap suppresses any magnetically mediated pairing. Away from half-filling the 
width of the pseudo-gap in the charge excitation spectrum is much smaller, of the order of J (see 
Sec. IV.D.3), so that magnetically mediated pairing is possible.

47


More insight in the nature of pairing was gained from further DCA/QMC studies of the 2D Hubbard 
model (Maier et al., 2004). Figure 38 shows the DCA/QMC re-
energies, Tr(tG) and Tr(ΣG) respectively, of the super-conducting (SC) and normal state (NS) 
solution as a function of temperature at low doping δ = 0.05 (left) and optimal doping δ = 0.20 
(right). For both doping levels,


1.2


1


T=0.022 T=0.019 T=0.011

30
T=0.022 T=0.019
25   T=0.011

0.6


0.5


T=0.022 T=0.019 T=0.011


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


0














-0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4
20


15


10


5


0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


0














0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

-0.270
-0.272
-0.274
-0.276
-0.278


δ=0.05

T    -0.306
c    -0.308
-0.310
-0.312
NS  -0.314 SC


δ=0.20 Tc



NS SC

ω[eV]
ω[eV]
ω[eV]
-0.380
δ=0.05  Tc
-0.244
δ=0.20 Tc

Figure 38 DOS (left), local dynamic spin susceptibility (cen-
ter) and local dynamic charge susceptibility (right) in the 2D Hubbard model at 5% doping at 
different temperatures above
and below the critical temperature Tc = 0.0218 = 0.087t cal-culated with DCA/QMC for a 4-site 
cluster, Nc = 4. Taken
-0.382
-0.384
-0.386
-0.388
-0.246
-0.248
NS  -0.250        NS
SC             SC
-0.252

from Maier et al. (2004).
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
T
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04
T


sult for the evolution of the DOS, the local dynamic spin-and local dynamic charge-susceptibility⁸ 
as the tempera-ture decreases below the critical temperature Tc. As dis-cussed in Sec. IV.D.3, the 
normal state low-temperature DOS and spin-susceptibility display a pseudogap, i.e. a depression of 
low-energy quasiparticle and spin excita-tions. Both quantities evolve smoothly across the 
super-conducting transition with the pseudogap changing to a superconducting gap⁹ below Tc.  
However since the charge susceptibility is peaked at zero frequency even slightly above Tc, it 
changes abruptly upon pairing to show the same behavior as the spin-susceptibility, includ-ing the 
superconducting gap at low frequencies. Remark-ably, well below Tc all quantities display narrow 
peaks at ω  0.1eV, delimiting the superconducting gap. This re-sult clearly indicates the formation 
of quasiparticles be-low Tc. The absence of quasiparticles in the normal state however undermines 
the very foundation of the BCS the-ory of conventional superconductors where pairing is a result of 
a Fermi surface instability that relies on the existence of quasiparticles in a Fermi-liquid 
(Schrieffer, 1993).
DCA/QMC results for the condensation energy further establish the unconventional character of 
superconduc-tivity in the 2D Hubbard model (Maier et al., 2004). Fig-ure 39 presents the kinetic 
(top) and potential (bottom)

Figure 39 Kinetic (top) and potential (bottom) energies ver-sus temperature in the normal (NS) and 
superconducting (SC) states in the 2D Hubbard model at 5% (left) and 20% (right) doping for U = 8t. 
 Tc is indicated by the vertical dotted lines. Taken from Maier et al. (2004).


the kinetic energy in the superconducting state is reduced compared to the normal state, while the 
potential ener-gies are almost identical. This result is in agreement with recent optical 
experiments which show that the supercon-ducting transition in the cuprates is due to a lowering of 
the electronic kinetic energy (Molegraaf et al., 2002). It further supports the evidence that 
pairing in the Hub-bard model is fundamentally different from BCS pairing which occurs through a 
reduction of the electronic po-tential energy accompanied by a slight increase in the kinetic 
energy.
The possibility of coexisting d-wave superconducting and antiferromagnetic order in the 2D Hubbard 
model was investigated by Lichtenstein and Katsnelson (2000) using a 4-site cluster approach 
similar to the DCA/QMC method (see Fig. 40(a)).  In this approach, an 8  8 matrix representation of 
the Green function is required to account for both the antiferromagnetic order param-eter ⟨c c ⟩ 
and the superconducting order parameter




⁸ Note that in the DCA, local quantities are identical in the lattice and on the cluster and thus 
are easily calculated.
⁹ Note that due to the finite resolution in momentum space, the DCA underestimates low-energy 
spectral weight in superconduc-tors where the gap has nodes on the Fermi surface. As a result, a 
fully developed gap is found at low temperatures instead of a DOS that vanishes linearly in 
frequency as expected for a d-wave superconductor.
ci↓cj† . Figure 40(c) reproduces the results for the two order parameters as a function of doping 
at fixed tem-perature in the weak coupling regime (U = 4.8t). The authors find that the 
antiferromagnetic order parameter coexists with the d-wave superconducting order param-eter over a 
wide range of doping. Consistent with the DCA/QMC results, the antiferromagnetic order parame-ter 
is maximal at zero doping where the superconducting order parameter vanishes due to the opening of 
the gap.

48


3 2
0 1

QMC
Δ
−Δ

(a)

DMFT

−Δ
300
T(K)
200

100

AF
0
 






PG

d-SC

(b)
0.1
Tc
TN
0.08
T*


0.06
0.6                                        Fermi Liquid like

M(μB)
0.4
(c)
F(0)
0.04

0.04

Pseudogap

0.2            0.02
AF


0.0
 
 




0.1 x



 
      
 
0.2

0.4
0.02

d-wave superconductivity

Figure 40 (a) Schematic representation of an antiferromag-netic d-wave 2  2 periodically repeated 
cluster. (b) Generic phase diagram of HTSC. (c) Magnetic (M) and d-wave super-conducting (F) order 
parameters versus hole-doping in the 2D Hubbard model at βt = 15, t′ = 0.15t, U = 4.8t calcu-lated 
with a 4-site cluster approach similar to the DCA/QMC.
Taken from Lichtenstein and Katsnelson (2000).


5. Phase diagram

The results reviewed in the preceding sections illus-trate that quantum cluster approaches applied 
to the 2D Hubbard model are able to capture the complex behav-ior observed in HTSC. The qualitative 
agreement with experiments is summarized in the Nc = 4 DCA/QMC temperature-doping (T -δ) phase 
diagram of the 2D Hub-bard model in the intermediate coupling regime U = W shown in Fig. 41. The 
phase boundaries were determined by the instabilities of the paramagnetic phase as indi-cated by 
the divergence of the corresponding susceptibil-ities. Therefore these results do not allow any 
conclu-sions about a possible coexistence of the antiferromag-netic and d-wave superconducting 
phases for δ < 0.5. The results by Lichtenstein and Katsnelson (2000) how-ever suggest this 
coexistence at least for weak coupling (see Fig. 40(c)).
The pseudogap crossover temperature T ∗ determined by the peak in the uniform spin susceptibility 
(see Fig. 32) serves as a boundary separating the observed Fermi liquid and non-Fermi liquid 
behavior. For T < T ∗ the self-energy shows non-Fermi liquid character for the parts on the Fermi 
surface near k = (π, 0) (see Fig. 34). Quasiparticle and low-energy spin excitations are 
sup-pressed as indicated by the pseudogap in the DOS and the spin-susceptibility (see Fig. 38). At 
δ & 0.2 Fermi-liquid behavior is recovered (see Fig. 34). At low temper-atures, the systems is 
antiferromagnetic near half-filling. The d-wave superconducting phase at finite doping has its 
maximum transition temperature at δ ≈ 0.05.
As indicated in Sec. IV.D.3, the Nc = 4 DCA cluster favors the spin-charge separated RVB state. The 
Nc = 4 results may thus be interpreted within the RVB picture (Anderson, 1987): The pairing of 
spins in singlets be-low the crossover temperature T ∗ results in the suppres-sion of low-energy 
spin excitations and consequently in
0
0    0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25   0.3
δ
Figure 41 Temperature-doping phase diagram of the 2D Hub-bard model when U = 8t calculated with 
DCA/QMC for a 4-site cluster, Nc = 4.  The error bars on T ∗ result from the difficulty in locating 
the maximum in the uniform spin susceptibility. Regions of antiferromagnetism, d-wave 
super-conducting and pseudogap behavior are seen.


a pseudogap in the density of states. Charge excitations are quasi-free as indicated by the 
zero-frequency peak in the charge susceptibility (see Fig. 38). Well below the transition spin and 
charge degrees of freedom recombine, forming electrons which pair. Frustrated kinetic energy is 
recovered as indicated by the reduction of the kinetic energy as the system goes superconducting 
(see Fig. 39). Although the properties of HTSC are well described by the Nc = 4 results, it is 
important to ask the ques-tion whether the phase diagram and in particular the observed RVB nature 
of the results are stable when the cluster size is increased. While the pseudogap temper-ature T ∗ 
may be expected to persist with increasing Nc, the transition temperatures to the antiferromagnetic 
and superconducting state are expected to fall to zero, as discussed in Sec. I.B (see also Fig. 
27).  This has been confirmed through simulations of larger clusters (Jarrell et al., 2004). A 
finite inter-planar coupling be-tween an infinite set of Hubbard planes may then be used to 
stabilize the transitions at larger Nc, at least to the an-tiferromagnetic state (Jarrell et al., 
2001b). The stability of the RVB behavior and even the superconductivity is less clear and more 
complex models may be necessary for
them to persist in larger clusters.


6. Studies of related models

a. Stripes in the t-J-model.  Several numerical studies indicate that there is a tendency for doped 
holes to form stripes separated by antiferromagnetic domains in strongly correlated systems (for a 
review see Dagotto, 1994). CPT is the quantum cluster method of choice to study the large unit 
cells in the inhomogeneous stripe phase, which complicate if not preclude the application of

49


the numerically more expensive embedded cluster tech-niques (CDMFT, DCA). A thorough study of 
stripes in the large U limit of the Hubbard model, the t-J model, was conducted by Zacher et al. 
(2002a,b) within the CPT. To implement the CPT for this problem, the authors divided the lattice 
into alternating clusters of metallic stripes and antiferromagnetic domains.  The inter-cluster 
hopping linking these clusters was treated perturbatively within the CPT. The enforced stripe 
pat-tern in this implementation prohibits to explore the sta-bility of stripes, but allows to 
investigate the effects of the stripe pattern on the single-particle excitations. In sys-tems with 
less than 12% doping the technique was shown to reproduce salient ARPES features in selected HTSC 
if a site-centered 3+1 stripe pattern, i.e. half-filled anti-ferromagnetic three-leg ladders 
separated by doped one-leg chains, was chosen (Zacher et al., 2002b). At higher dopings the 
comparison with ARPES indicates that the weight of bond-centered stripes with a 2+2 pattern 
in-creases in which excess holes proliferate out of the stripes into the antiferromagnetic domain 
(Zacher et al., 2002a).


b. Spectral properties of the three-band Hubbard model.  In the context of HTSC, the single-band 
Hubbard model can be viewed as a low-energy approximation of the more complex and more realistic 
three-band Hubbard model (Emery, 1987; Emery and Reiter, 1988). The three-band Hubbard model takes 
into account the pₓ and py oxygen orbitals in addition to the Cu d degrees of freedom in the 
superconducting CuO₂ planes. The CPT study of its spectral properties by Dahnken et al. (2002) 
shows very good agreement with ARPES data on HTSC at half-filling as well as in the doped system 
including a hole-like Fermi surface at high doping which splits into an electron- and hole-like 
branch when a bilayer hopping t⊥ is included.


c. Cluster simulations of the periodic Anderson model.  The periodic Anderson model (PAM) is widely 
considered to be a paradigm for a variety of rare-earth and actinide compounds including the heavy 
Fermion systems. It is composed of a strongly hybridizing band of d electrons and a weakly 
hybridizing band of correlated f -electrons described by the Hamiltonian
H = −t Σ(d† d  + h.c.) + Σ Qd(nᵈ + nᵈ )
half filled, the system becomes more metallic, and the Kondo scale is strongly suppressed compared 
to that of the SIAM. In both the insulator and metal, the tempera-ture dependence of the impurity 
susceptibility and many other low temperature quantities deviate strongly from that of the SIAM 
(Tahvildar-Zadeh et al., 1997).
Non-local corrections were studied by Shimizu (2002) who used the DCA together with the NCA as a 
clus-ter solver to study the single-particle spectra. He finds large deviations from the DMFT 
result due to the ef-fects of RKKY exchange.  At half filling, where the RKKY exchange is strong 
and antiferromagnetic, he finds a large gap of the order of the RKKY exchange energy. When the 
filling of the conduction band is small and the RKKY exchange is weaker and ferromagnetic, the 
coher-ence peak is restored.


V. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES

In this review we tried to convey the message that quantum cluster approaches provide powerful 
theoreti-cal tools to study the rich phenomenology in systems dominated by strong electronic 
interactions, such as most notably transition metal oxides, heavy Fermion and one-dimensional 
systems including superconducting and mag-netic compounds. Quantum cluster approaches are 
non-perturbative in nature, their quality can be systemati-cally improved by increasing the cluster 
size, and they provide complementary information to finite size simula-tions. By mapping the 
lattice problem to a finite size cluster they describe short-ranged correlations within the cluster 
accurately while approximating longer-ranged physics on the mean-field level. Of the various 
attempts to add non-local corrections to local approximations such as DMFT, we focused in this 
review on three established quantum cluster approaches which we believe to play the major role in 
the description of many-particle systems.
The cluster perturbation theory provides a very eco-nomic way to calculate the single-particle 
dynamics by continuing the results of an isolated finite size cluster to the thermodynamic limit. 
For a cluster consisting of a single site only this method is identical to the Hubbard-I 
approximation, while it recovers the exact result in the infinite size cluster limit. When combined 
with the self-energy functional approach, the CPT can also be used to study instabilities to 
symmetry broken phases.
Both embedded cluster techniques, the dynamical clus-
+ Σ Qf (nf + nf ) + U Σ nf nf     (185)  theory are superior to the CPT in that they map the

i†  i↓
i
i† ↓
i
lattice to an embedded cluster instead of the CPT’s iso-lated cluster. This leads to a 
self-consistent theory with

DMFT simulations of the PAM reveal an antiferromag-netic insulating phase at half filling of both 
the f and d bands. The gap is set by the Kondo coherence scale T₀ which is strongly enhanced 
compared to the single-impurity model (SIAM) scale. When the d-band is doped away from half filling 
while the f -band remains roughly
a single-particle coupling between the cluster and the host. As a result both DCA and CDMFT 
naturally allow for the study of phase-transitions and they provide ther-modynamically consistent 
results on the one- and two-particle level.
CDMFT can be viewed as a direct generalization of

50


DMFT to a cluster in real space. The mapping between lattice and cluster problems is identical to 
that of the long established MCPA for disordered systems. It leads to a cluster with open boundary 
conditions which vi-olates translational symmetries. In contrast the DCA cluster is defined in 
cluster reciprocal space. Hence the DCA cluster has periodic boundary conditions and there-fore 
preserves the translational symmetries of the lattice. This difference in boundary conditions 
translates directly to different asymptotic behaviors for large linear cluster sizes Lc, and the 
decision which method to use for a given problem strongly depends on the quantities of interest: 
Local quantities, such as the local density of states when defined on central cluster sites 
converge faster in the CDMFT since they do not directly couple to the mean-field. Due to the large 
mean-field coupling of the surface sites however, the CDMFT converges slowly, with correc-tions of 
order  (1/Lc), for quantities extended over the cluster. The DCA converges more quickly, as  
(1/L²), due to the periodic boundary conditions on the cluster.
Quantum cluster approaches reduce the complexity of the infinite lattice problem by mapping it to a 
cluster with fewer degrees of freedom. The numerous methods employed to solve the DMFT equations 
are in princi-ple available to study the effective cluster model. How-ever as the complexity of 
this task rapidly increases with cluster size, potential cluster solvers are faced with severe size 
limitations.  As the most promising tech-niques we reviewed perturbative approaches including the 
fluctuation-exchange approximation and the non-crossing approximation as well as non-perturbative 
tech-niques including quantum Monte Carlo and numerical renormalization group.
We discussed the application of quantum cluster ap-proaches to a wide range of problems in 
condensed matter physics. The information gained from these studies has led to significant progress 
in the field of strongly corre-lated electron systems. Even studies using small cluster sizes 
opened up new insight in problems such as one-dimensional systems, the Mott-Hubbard transition in 
two dimensions and high-temperature superconductivity.
To gain conclusive evidence however, larger cluster size studies are inevitable to verify the 
information obtained from small clusters. This task is severely hampered by the rapidly increasing 
complexity with cluster size. Fu-ture progress therefore is closely linked to improvements in the 
efficiency and flexibility of the techniques used to solve the effective cluster problem. Within 
quantum cluster approaches we explore a coarse-graining approx-imation in k-space.  To further 
reduce the complexity, the same idea could be transfered to the frequency do-main.  By 
coarse-graining the frequency dependence of irreducible quantities, correlations on long time 
scales are neglected, while the short time scale behavior is described accurately. An important 
aspect in this context is again the causality question.  First test results are encourag-ing; they 
show that coarse-graining in Matsubara space leads to acausalities, while coarse-graining the real 
fre-
quency axis does not face this problem (Aryanpour et al., 2003a).
Another route to defeat the cluster size problem is to develop hybrid algorithms that treat 
different length-scales in the problem with different accuracy.  As a promising step in this 
direction, Hague et al. (2003) have developed a hybrid technique which maps the infinite lat-tice 
onto two embedded clusters of different size, thus dividing the problem into three length-scales.  
Short-ranged correlations described by the small cluster are treated accurately within QMC, 
correlations of interme-diate length-scale are treated perturbatively in the large cluster using 
FLEX, and the long-ranged physics beyond the size of the larger cluster is again approximated on 
the mean-field level.
To improve comparisons with experiments and to achieve predictive capability, the inclusion of the 
specifics of the actual materials is required. Along the lines of the LDA+DMFT approach, one can 
use electronic structure calculations to parameterize the models studied by quan-tum cluster 
approaches. First steps in this direction have been made by Poteryaev et al. (2003). A more 
integrated approach to the ab-initio description of strongly corre-lated systems by combining the 
ideas of density func-tional theory and quantum cluster approaches remains an important and 
challenging task.


Acknowledgments

It is a pleasure to acknowledge useful discussions with H. R. Krishnamurthy, J. Keller, H. Keiter,
E. Mu¨ller-Hartmann P. van Dongen A. Gonis, B. Gy-orffy, M. Mukherjee, A. N. Tavildar-Zadeh, G. 
Baskaran,
M. Vojta, R. Bulla, A. Lichtenstein, K. Aryanpour and
G. Kotliar. This work was supported in part by NSF grants DMR-0312680, DMR-0113574, and DMR-0073308
and by the DFG through SFB 484. We acknowledge su-percomputer support by the Leibniz Computer 
Center, the Max-Planck Computer Center Garching under grant h0301, the Ohio Supercomputer Center, 
the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center (NSF) and the Center for Compu-tational Sciences at the Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory. Part of this research was performed by TM as Eugene P. Wigner Fellow and 
staff member at the Oak Ridge Na-tional Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725.


References

Abrikosov, A., L. Gorkov, and I. Dzyaloshinski, 1963, Methods of Quantum Field Theory in 
Statistical Physics (Dover). Aichhorn, M., M. Daghofer, H. Evertz, and W. v.d. Linden,
2003, Phys. Rev. B 67, 161103.
Anderson, P., 1961, Phys. Rev. 124, 41. Anderson, P., 1997a, Adv. Phys. 46, 3. Anderson, P. W., 
1987, Science 235, 1196.

51


Anderson, P. W., 1997b, The Theory of Superconductivity in the High-Tc Cuprates (Princeton 
University Press, Prince-ton, NJ).
Aryanpour, K., M. H. Hettler, and M. Jarrell, 2002, Phys. Rev. B 65, 153102.
Aryanpour, K., M. H. Hettler, and M. Jarrell, 2003a, Phys. Rev. B 67, 085101.
Aryanpour, K., T. A. Maier, and M. Jarrell, 2003b, preprint cond-mat/0301460 .
Baym, G., 1962, Phys. Rev. 127, 1391.
Baym, G., and L. Kadanoff, 1961, Phys. Rev. 124, 287. Becker, K., and J. Keller, 1987, Z. Phys. B 
36, 2036.
Beeby, J. L., and S. F. Edwards, 1962, Proc. Roy. Soc. (Lon-don) A274, 395.
Bethe, H. A., 1935, Proc. R. Soc. London A150, 552. Betts, D., and G. Stewart, 1997, Can. J. Phys. 
75, 47. Bickers, N., 1987, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 845.
Bickers, N., D. Cox, and J. Wilkins, 1987, Phys. Rev. B 36, 2036.
Bickers, N., D. Scalapino, and S. White, 1989, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 961.
Bickers, N., and S. R. White, 1990, Phys. Rev. B 43, 8044. Biroli, G., and G. Kotliar, 2002, Phys. 
Rev. B 65, 155112. Biroli, G., O. Parcollet, and G. Kotliar, 2003, preprint con-
mat/0307587 .
Bolech, C., S. Kancharla, and G. Kotliar, 2003, Phys. Rev. B 67, 075110.
Brandt, U., and U. Mielsch, 1989, Z. Phys. B 75, 365. Brandt, U., and R. Schmidt, 1986, Z. Phys. B 
63, 45. Brandt, U., and R. Schmidt, 1987, Z. Phys. B 67, 43. Bulla, R., 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 
136.
Bulla, R., T. Costi, and D. Vollhardt, 2001, Phys. Rev. B 64, 045103.
Bulla, R., A. Hewson, and T. Pruschke, 1998, J. Phys.: Con-dens. Matter 10, 8365.
Caffarel, M., and W. Krauth, 1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1545. Cox, D., and N. Grewe, 1987, Z. Phys. 
B 71, 321.
Creffield, C., E. Klepfish, E. Pike, and S. Sarkar, 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 517.
Dagotto, E., 1994, Rev. Mod. Phys 66, 763.
Dagotto, E., and A. Moreo, 1988, Phys. Rev. B 38, 5078. Dahnken, C., M. Aichhorn, W. Hanke, E. 
Arrigoni, and
M. Potthoff, 2003, preprint cond-mat/0309407 .
Dahnken, C., E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, 2002, J. Low Temp. Phys. 126, 949.
Deisz, J., D. Hess, and J. Serene, 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1312.
Deisz, J., D. Hess, and J. Serene, 2003, Recent Progress in many Body Theories, volume 4 (Plenum, 
New York).
Ducastelle, F., 1974, J. Phys C 7, 1795.
Emery, V., 1987, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794.
Emery, V., and G. Reiter, 1988, Phys. Rev. B 38, 4547. Fetter, A., and J. Walecka, 1971, Quantum 
Theory of Many-
Particle Systems, International Series in Pure and Applied Physics (McGraw-Hill, New York).
Fischer, K., 1997, Phys. Rev. B 55, 13575.
Fisher, M., and M. Barber, 1972, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 1516. Georges, A., and G. Kotliar, 1992, 
Phys. Rev. B 45, 6479. Georges, A., G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and M. Rozenberg, 1996,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 68, 13.
Goldenfeld, N., 1992, Lectures on Phase Transitions and the Renormalization Group, Frontiers in 
Physics (Addison Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts).
Gonis, A., 1992, Green Functions for Ordered and Disordered
Systems, Studies in Mathematical Physics (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Grewe, N., 1983, Z. Phys. B 53, 271.
Grewe, N., 1987, Z. Phys. B 67, 323.
Grewe, N., H. Keiter, and T. Pruschke, 1988, Z. Phys. B 71, 75.
Gros, C., and R. Valenti, 1994, Annalen der Phys. 3, 460. Hague, J., 2003, J. Phys.: Cond. Mat. 15, 
2535.
Hague, J., M. Jarrell, and T. Schulthess, 2003, preprint cond-mat/0312155 .
Haydock, R., V. Heine, and M. J. Kelly, 1975, J. Phys. C 8, 2591.
Heindl, W., T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 2000, J. Phys.: Con-dens. Matter 12, 2245.
Hettler, M. H., M. Mukherjee, M. Jarrell, and H. R. Krishna-murthy, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 61, 12739.
Hettler, M. H., A. N. Tahvildar-Zadeh, M. Jarrell, T. Pr-uschke, and H. R. Krishnamurthy, 1998, 
Phys. Rev. B 58, R7475.
Hewson, A., 1993, The Kondo Problem to Heavy Fermions, Cambridge Studies in Magnetism (Cambridge 
UNiversity Press, Cambridge).
Hirsch, J., 1983, Phys. Rev. B 28, 4059.
Hirsch, J., and R. Fye, 1986, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 2521. Hohenadler, M., M. Aichhorn, and W. v.d. 
Linden, 2003,
Phys. Rev. B 68, 184304.
Hubbard, J., 1963, Proc. Royal. Soc. London 276, 238. Huscroft, C., R. Gass, and M. Jarrell, 2000, 
Phys. Rev. B 61,
9300.
Huscroft, C., M. Jarrell, T. Maier, S. Moukouri, and
A. Tahvildarzadeh, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 139.
Imai, Y., and N. Kawakami, 2002, Phys. Rev. B 65, 233103.
Itzykson, C., and J.-M. Drouffe, 1989, Statistical Field Theory (Cambridge University Press).
Jakliˇc, J., and P. Prelovˇsek, 2000, Adv. Phys. 49, 1. Jarrell, M., 1992, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 
168.
Jarrell, M., H. Akhlaghpour, and T. Pruschke, 1993, Quan-tum Monte Carlo Methods in Condensed 
Matter Physics (Worl Scientific, Singapore), chapter Quantum Monte Carlo in the Infinite 
Dimensional Limit, pp. 221–234.
Jarrell, M., and J. Gubernatis, 1996, Physics Reports 269, 133.
Jarrell, M., and D. Johnson, 2004, in preparation .
Jarrell, M., and H. R. Krishnamurthy, 2001, Phys. Rev. B 63, 125102.
Jarrell, M., T. Maier, M. H. Hettler, and A. N. Tahvil-darzadeh, 2001a, Europhys. Lett. 56, 563.
Jarrell, M., T. Maier, C. Huscroft, and S. Moukouri, 2001b, Phys. Rev. B 64, 195130.
Jarrell, M., T. Maier, and T. Schulthess, 2004, in preparation
.
Jarrell, M., and T. Pruschke, 1993, Z. Phys. B 90, 187. Jones, B., and C. Varma, 1987, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 58, 843. Jones, B., C. Varma, and J. Wilkins, 1988, Phys. Rev. Lett.
61, 125.
Kakehashi, Y., 2002, Phys. Rev. B 66, 104428.
Kampf, A., and J. Schrieffer, 1990, Phys. Rev. B 42, 7967. Keiter, H., and C. Czycholl, 1983, J. 
Magn. and Magn. Mat.
31–34, 477.
Keiter, H., and J. Kimball, 1970, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 672. Keiter, H., and J. Kimball, 1971, Int. 
J. Magn. 1, 233.
Kikuchi, R., 1951, Phys. Rev. 81, 988.
Kim, C., Y. Kuramoto, and T. Kasoya, 1990, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 59, 2414.

52


Kotliar, G., S. Savrasov, G. Pallson, and G. Biroli, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 186401.
Krishnamurthy, H., J. Wilkins, and K. Wilson, 1980a, Phys. Rev. B 21, 1003.
Krishnamurthy, H., J. Wilkins, and K. Wilson, 1980b, Phys. Rev. B 21, 1044.
Kuramoto, Y., 1983, Z. Phys. B 53, 37.
Kuramoto, Y., 1985, Springer Series in Sol. State , 152. Laad, M. S., and M. van den Bossche, 2000, 
J. Phys.: Con-
dens. Matter 12, 2209.
Landau, D., 1976, Phys. Rev. B 13, 2997.
Lichtenstein, A. I., and M. I. Katsnelson, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 62, R9283.
Lieb, E., and F. Wu, 1968, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1445. Lombardo, P., M. Avignon, J. Schmalian, and 
K. Bennemann,
1996, Phys. Rev. B 54, 5317.
Maier, T., 2001, Nonlocal Dynamical Correlations in Strongly Interacting Fermion Systems (Logos 
Verlag Berlin, Berlin, Germany).
Maier, T., 2003, preprint cond-mat/0312447 .
Maier, T., and M. Jarrell, 2002, Phys. Rev. B 65, 041104. Maier, T., M. Jarrell, A. Macridin, and 
C. Slezak, 2004, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 92, 027005.
Maier, T., M. Jarrell, A. Macridin, and F.-C. Zhang, 2002a, preprint cond-mat/0208419 .
Maier, T., M. Jarrell, T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 2000a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1524.
Maier, T., M. Jarrell, T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 2000b, Eur. Phys. J B 13, 613.
Maier, T., M. Zo¨lfl, T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 1999a, Eur. Phys. J. B 7, 377.
Maier, T., M. Zo¨lfl, T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 1999b, Physica B 259, 747.
Maier, T. A., O. Gonzalez, M. Jarrell, and T. Schulthess, 2002b, Two Quantum Cluster 
Approximations, Springer Proceedings in Physics.
Matsumoto, H., and F. Mancini, 1997, Phys. Rev. B 55, 2095. Metzner, W., and D. Vollhardt, 1989, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,
324.
Minh-Tien, T., 1998, Phys. Rev. B 58, R15965.
Minh-Tien, T., 1999a, Europhys. Lett. 47, 582. Minh-Tien, T., 1999b, Phys. Rev. B 60, 16371. 
Minh-Tien, T., 2001, Phys. Rev. B 63, 165117.
Molegraaf, H. J. A., C. Presura, D. van der Marel, P. H. Kes, and M. Li, 2002, Science 295, 2239.
Monthoux, P., A. Balatsky, and D. Pines, 1991, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3448.
Moukouri, S., S. Allen, F. Lemay, B. Kyong, D. Poulin,
Y. Vilk, and A.-M. Tremblay, 1999, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7887. Moukouri, S., and M. Jarrell, 2001, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 87,
167010.
Mu¨ller-Hartmann, E., 1984, Z. Phys. B 57, 293. Mu¨ller-Hartmann, E., 1989a, Z. Phys. B 76, 211. 
Mu¨ller-Hartmann, E., 1989b, Z. Phys. B 74, 507. Nordheim, J., 1931a, Ann. Physik 9, 607.
Nordheim, J., 1931b, Ann. Physik 9, 641.
Okamoto, S., A. Millis, H. Monien, and A. Fuhrmann, 2003, Phys. Rev. B 68, 195121.
Oliveira, W., and L. Oliveira, 1994, Phys. Rev. B 49, 11986. Pairault, S., D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. 
Tremblay, 1998, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 80, 5389.
Pairault, S., D. S´en´echal, and A.-M. Tremblay, 2000, Eur. Phys. J. B 16, 85.
Parcollet, O., G. Biroli, and G. Kotliar, 2003, preprint cond-
mat/0308577 .
Parmenter, R. H., 1955, Phys. Rev. 97, 587.
Paula, C., M. Silva, and L. Oliveira, 1999, Phys. Rev. B 59, 85.
Poteryaev, A., A. Lichtenstein, and G. Kotliar, 2003, preprint cond-mat/0311319 .
Potthoff, M., 2003a, preprint cond-mat/0309407 . Potthoff, M., 2003b, Eur. Phys. J. B 32, 429.
Potthoff, M., M. Aichhorn, and C. Dahnken, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 206402.
Pruschke, T., R. Bulla, and M. Jarrell, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 61, 12799.
Pruschke, T., D. Cox, and M. Jarrell, 1993a, Europhys. Lett.
21, 593.
Pruschke, T., D. Cox, and M. Jarrell, 1993b, Phys. Rev. B 47, 3553.
Pruschke, T., and N. Grewe, 1989, Z. Phys. B 74, 439. Pruschke, T., M. Jarrell, and J. Freericks, 
1995, Adv. in Phys.
44, 187.
Pruschke, T., and R. Zitzler, 2003, J. Phys. Chem. 15, 7867. Roth, L. M., 1969, Phys. Rev. 184, 
461.
Sakai, O., and Y. Kuramoto, 1994, Solid State Commun. 89, 307.
Sakai, O., and Y. Shimizu, 1992, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 61, 2333. Sakai, O., Y. Shimizu, and T. Kasuya, 
1989, J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn. 59, 3666.
Sakai, O., Y. Shimizu, and T. Kasuya, 1990, Solid State Comm. 75, 81.
Scalapino, D., 1999, J. Low Temp. Phys. 117(3-4), 179. Schiller, A., and K. Ingersent, 1995, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 75, 113. Schmalian, J., P. Lombardo, M. Avignon, and K. Bennemann,
1996, Physica B 222–224, 602.
Schoen, J. M., 1969, Phys. Rev. 184, 858.
Schrieffer, J., 1993, Theory of Superconductivity (Addison Wesley, Reading, MA).
Schwartz, L., F. Brouers, A. V. Vedyayev, and H. Ehrenreich, 1971, Phys. Rev. B 4, 3383.
S´en´echal, D., D. Perez, and M. Pioro-Ladri´ere, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 522.
S´en´echal, D., D. Perez, and D. Plouffe, 2002, Phys. Rev. B 66, 075129.
S´en´echal, D., and A.-M. Tremblay, 2003, preprint cond-mat/0308625 .
Shiba, H., 1971, Prog. Theo. Phys. 46, 77.
Shimizu, Y., 2002, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 71, 1166.
Shimizu, Y., and O. Sakai, 1995, Computational Physics as a New Frontier in Condensed Matter 
Research (The Physical Society of Japan), p. 42.
Si, Q., M. J. Rozenberg, G. Kotliar, and A. E. Ruckenstein, 1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2761.
Smith, J., and Q. Si, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 61, 5184. Soven, P., 1967, Phys. Rev. 156, 809.
Stanescu, T. D., and P. Phillips, 2001, Phys. Rev. B 64, 235117.
Stanescu, T. D., and P. Phillips, 2003a, preprint cond-mat/0301254 .
Stanescu, T. D., and P. Phillips, 2003b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 017002.
Sumi, H., 1974, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 36, 770.
Suzuki, M., 1986, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn 55, 4205.
Tahvildar-Zadeh, A., M. Jarrell, and J. Freericks, 1997, Phys. Rev. B 55, R3332.
Tanh-Hai, D., and T. Minh-Tien, 2001, J. Phys.: Condens.

53


Matter 13, 5625.
Taylor, D., 1967, Phys. Rev. 156, 1017.
Timusk, T., and B. Statt, 1999, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, 61. Tsukada, M., 1969, J. Phs. Soc. Jpn 26, 
684.
Vekic, M., and S. White, 1993, Phys. Rev. B 47, 1160. Vidberg, H. J., and J. W. Serene, 1977, J. 
Low. Temp. Phys.
19, 179.
Voit, J., 1994, Rep. Prog. Phys. 57, 977.
de Vries, P., K. Michelsen, , and H. De Raedt, 1993a, Z. Phys. B 92, 353.
de Vries, P., K. Michelsen, and H. De Raedt, 1993b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2463.
de Vries, P., K. Michelsen, and H. De Raedt, 1994, Z. Phys. B 95, 475.
Weiss, P., 1907, J. Phys. Radium 6, 661.
Wilson, K., 1975, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 773.
Zacher, M. G., R. Eder, E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, 2002a, Phys. Rev. B 65, 045109.
Zacher, M. G., R. Eder, E. Arrigoni, and W. Hanke, 2002b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2585.
Zhang, F., and T. Rice, 1988, Phys. Rev. B 37, 3759. Zhang, F., and T. Rice, 1990, Phys. Rev. B 41, 
7243. Zitzler, R., T. Pruschke, and R. Bulla, 2002, Eur. Phys. J. B
27, 473.
Zitzler, R., N. Tong, T. Pruschke, and R. Bulla, 2003, preprint cond-mat/0308202 .
Zo¨lfl, M., T. Maier, T. Pruschke, and J. Keller, 2000, Eur. Phys. J. B 13, 47.
