Bath optimization in the Cellular Dynamical Mean Field Theory
David S´en´echal
D´epartement de physique and Regroupement qu´eb´ecois sur les mat´eriaux de pointe,
Universit´e de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qu´ebec, Canada, J1K 2R1
(Dated: April 6, 2019)
In the Cellular Dynamical Mean Field Theory (CDMFT), a strongly correlated system is rep-resented 
by a small cluster of correlated sites, coupled to an adjustable bath of uncorrelated sites 
simulating the cluster’s environment; the parameters governing the bath are set by a 
self-consistency condition involving the local Green function and the lattice electron dispersion. 
Solving the cluster problem with an exact diagonalization method is only practical for small bath 
sizes (8 sites). In that case the self-consistency condition cannot be exactly satisfied and is 
replaced by a minimiza-tion procedure. There is some freedom in the definition of the ‘merit 
function’ to optimize. We use Potthoff’s Self-Energy Functional Approach on the one- and 
two-dimensional Hubbard models to gain insight into the best choice for this merit function. We 
argue that several merit functions should be used and preference given to the one that leads to the 
smallest gradient of the Potthoff self-energy functional. We propose a new merit function weighted 
with the self-energy that seems to fit the Mott transition in two dimensions better than other 
merit functions.


I. INTRODUCTION

The discovery of high-temperature superconductors in the late 1980’s and the hypothesis that the 
mechanism of superconductivity in these materials is rooted in strong electron-electron 
interactions has stimulated theoretical investigation of lattice models of strongly-correlated 
elec-trons, such as the Hubbard model. One of the early suc-cesses of this program was a new 
understanding of the metal-insulator transition in the Hubbard model using Dynamical Mean-Field 
Theory (DMFT)¹. A central hy-pothesis behind DMFT, proven exact in the limit of in-finite 
dimension,² is that the momentum dependence of the electron self-energy Σ(k, ω) may be neglected; 
DMFT focuses instead on the frequency dependence, which it determines approximately within a 
self-consistent proce-dure.  This is equivalent to replacing the original Hub-bard model by an 
effective model in which a single site – the “impurity” – is embedded in the lattice through 
hybridization with a bath of uncorrelated orbitals. The one-particle Green function G(ω) for the 
correlated site then takes the form
G−¹(ω) = ω − Γ(ω) − Σ(ω)     (1)
where Σ(ω) is the approximate electron self-energy and Γ(ω) is the so-called hybridization function 
that incorpo-rates the effect of the uncorrelated bath on the electron propagation. The 
hybridization function is found by an
tum dependence of the self-energy inferred from photoe-mission experiments.³ The Dynamical Cluster 
Approxi-mation (DCA)⁴,⁵ and the Cellular Dynamical Mean-Field Theory (CDMFT)⁶ are two 
generalizations of DMFT to finite clusters, that take into account short-range spatial 
correlations. Both have revealed antiferromagnetic order and d-wave pairing in the Hubbard 
model.⁷–¹² They differ in that DCA is formulated in reciprocal space, by parti-tioning the 
Brillouin zone into a finite number of patches, whereas the CDMFT is formulated in direct space, by 
tiling the lattice into identical clusters with open bound-ary conditions.
Solving the impurity problem in DMFT (or in its clus-ter extensions) may be done at finite 
temperature via Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) or, as proposed in Ref. 13, by the exact diagonalization 
(ED) of an associated An-derson Hamiltonian at zero-temperature.  The Monte Carlo approach has the 
advantage of simulating an effec-tively infinite bath and of providing temperature infor-mation. On 
the other hand, it suffers from the infamous fermion sign problem, which makes convergence slow and

7    8
ε₂     ε₂
11            12
θ2    θ2            3    4

interative procedure that involves (i) the solution of the impurity model and (ii) self-consistence 
between the elec-tron Green function at the impurity site and the Green function G(k, ω) 
constructed from the self-energy Σ(ω) via Dyson’s equation (more details on this below).
The importance of short-range antiferromagnetic fluc-tuations in Hubbard models and the possible 
existence of
θ₁  θ₁
ε₁     ε₁



(A)
1   2
9            10

5    6
(B)

d-wave pairing has motivated the extension of DMFT to procedures where not only a site, but a 
finite cluster of sites, is embedded in the full lattice via a hybridization function. This is 
further motivated by the strong momen-
FIG. 1.  (Color online) Examples of clusters (blue circles) with finite baths (squares). Cluster 
(A) is used to treat the one-dimensional Hubbard model and (B) the two-dimensional Hubbard model.

2


the computational requirements important, even with the latest continuous-time algorithms free of 
discretization error.¹⁴ It is also very difficult to extract real-frequency dynamical information 
from it. The pros and cons of the ED approach complement those of the QMC approach:
(1) it is usually carried at zero temperature; (2) it pro-vides real-frequency information; (3) it 
does not suffer

Initial guess for Γ


Cluster Solver: Compute G

G¯ =  L Σ˜[G−¹(k˜) − Σ(ω)]−¹

discrete bath system. This last characteristic is its most serious drawback, and the one we will 
deal with in this paper.
In Section II we review the CDMFT algorithm and explain how the restriction to a finite bath turns 
the self-consistency into an optimization problem whose solution
G −¹ = G¯−1 + Σ


update Γ by minimizing d

depends on a choice of merit function. In Section III we review Potthoff’s self-energy functional 
approach and as-sert that it provides the best possible hybridization func-
No  Γ converged?
Yes
Exit

tion for the finite-bath problem. In Section IV we show
the outcome of CDMFT calculations on the one- and two-dimensional Hubbard models, using various 
merit func-tions, and compare them with SFA results. We propose to select the merit function that 
minimizes the gradient of the Potthoff functional, in the cases where the SFA cannot be practically 
applied.
FIG. 2. (Color online) The CDMFT algorithm with an exact diagonalization solver.


exact diagonalization in order to accelerate convergence and cut memory costs.¹⁵,¹⁷
The effect of the bath on the electron Green function is encapsulated in the so-called 
hybridization function
Σ θiµθ∗

II. THE CELLULAR DYNAMICAL MEAN
FIELD THEORY
Γij(ω) =
µ
jµ
ω − εµ
(3)

In CDMFT, the full lattice Hubbard Hamiltonian H is replaced by the following cluster Hamiltonian:
H′ = − Σ tijc† cjσ + U Σ ni↑ni↓
which enters the cluster electron Green function as
G′−¹ = ω − t′ − Γ(ω) − Σ(ω)      (4)
where we hide site and spin indices behind a matrix nota-

i,j,σ         i
+ Σ θiµ(c† aµσ + H.c.) + Σ εµa†

aµσ
(2)
tion for the cluster one-body terms (t′, including chemical potential), the hybridization function 
(Γ), the self-energy

iσ
i,µ,σ
µσ
µ,σ
(Σ) and the cluster Green function (G′).

where ciσ annihilates an electron of spin σ on a physical site labelled i, and aµσ annihilates an 
electron of spin σ on a bath orbital labelled µ. The bath is parametrized by the energy of each 
orbital (εµ) and by the bath-cluster hybridization matrix θiµ (we assume spin-independence for 
simplicity; this would not be the case in a treat-ment of antiferromagnetism).  Note that ‘bath 
site’ is a misnomer, as bath orbitals have no physical position assigned to them. The clusters and 
baths used in this work are shown on Fig. 1. Our convention is to add to the above Hamiltonian a 
chemical potential term  µNˆ, where Nˆ is the total number of electrons in the cluster and the 
bath.
Note that a more general parametrization of the sys-
tems illustrated on Fig. 1 is possible¹⁵,¹⁶; in particular, the most general bath made of 8 
orbitals and compati-
The basic computational task of DMFT approaches is to find the best possible embedding of the 
cluster into the original lattice; that is, to find the best possible value of the bath parameters. 
In CDMFT, this is accomplished via a self-consistency condition, using the following iter-ative 
algorithm, summarized in Fig. 2:
1. Start with a guess value of the bath parameters (θiµ, εµ), that define the hybridization 
function (3).
2. Calculate the cluster Green function G′(ω) with the Exact diagonalization solver and extract the 
cluster self-energy Σ(ω).
3. Construct the momentum-dependent Green func-tion G(k˜, ω) from that self-energy and project it 
back on the cluster via a Fourier transform:

ble with the discrete symmetry of the cluster of Fig. 1B would require 16 parameters. But our 
purpose is to il-lustrate the relationship between the CDMFT-ED proce-
G¯(ω) = ∫
     1   
k˜ G−¹(k˜) − Σ(ω)
(5)

dure and Potthoff’s self-energy functional approach, and accordingly we choose to limit the size of 
the parame-ter set. In practice, cluster symmetries are used in the
where k˜ stands for an integral over the reduced Brillouin zone, along with the appropriate factors
of 2π.

3


4. Calculate the matrix
G−1(ω) = G¯−1 + Σ(ω)      (6)

5. Choose new bath parameters that make the com-bination ω  t′  Γ(ω) as close as possible to −¹. 
Since we have a finite number of bath parameters at our disposal, this self-consistency condition 
cannot be fulfilled for all frequencies, but only optimized. This is done by minimizing the 
distance function
sense that its form does not depend on the one-body part t of the Hamiltonian, but only on the 
interaction part. This means that it can be evaluated by considering a dif-ferent Hamiltonian, H′, 
that shares the same interaction part with the original Hamiltonian H, but has a different one-body 
part. In particular, the cluster Hamiltonian (2) falls in that category. This allows us to extract 
the value of the functional F evaluated at the physical self-energy of H′ and to calculate
Ωt[Σ] = Ω′ + Tr ln(−G′) − Tr ln(−G)   (11)
Σ      ′       −1 
	


over the set of bath parameters. Changing the bath parameters at this step does not require a new 
so-lution of the Hamiltonian H′, but merely a recal-culation of the hybridization matrix (3).
more explicit expression is
Ωt[Σ] = Ω′ − T Σ ∫ ln det h1 − (tk˜



− t′)G′(k˜, ω)i (12)

6. Go back to step (2) with the new bath parameters obtained from this minimization, and repeat 
until they are converged.
In practice, the distance function (7) can take various forms, depending on the heuristic weight 
function W (ω). So far, ad hoc criteria and intuition have been used to choose the weight function. 
Those that are benchmarked in this paper are listed in Eq. (15) below. The sum over frequencies in 
Eq. (7) is carried over a set of equally spaced Matsubara frequencies, defined by some fictitious 
inverse temperature β, typically ranging from 20 to 200 (in units of t−¹).

III. THE SFA APPROACH
where tk˜ is the one-body matrix of the original system (here expressed as a matrix over cluster 
site indices and a function over the reduced Brillouin zone) and t′ is the one-body matrix of the 
cluster Hamiltonian H′. T is the absolute temperature and the sum is carried over Mat-subara 
frequencies (at zero temperature this translates into an integral over the imaginary-frequency 
axis).
The bath system is of course assumed to be decoupled from the cluster in the original Hamiltonian 
H. With a finite bath, the functional Ωt becomes effectively an ordinary function of the bath 
parameters θiµ and εµ. An objective answer to the question of what are the optimal values of the 
bath parameters is obtained by solving the stationary condition ∂Ωt/∂h = 0, where h stands for any 
one of the bath parameters.  This condition may be further explicited as

There is a more fundamental way to find the best pos-sible value of the bath parameters: Potthoff’s 
self-energy functional approach (SFA).¹⁸ Let us summarize this ap-

Tr 
ω

G′−1

(ω) − G¯−1
(ω)i ·
∂Σ′(ω)
∂h

= 0.  (13)

proach here: The self-energy Σ of any system obeys a variational principle in the space of all 
possible self-energies:
δΩt,U [Σ]
where G¯(ω) stands for the Brillouin zone averaged Green function defined in Eq. (5). Note that the 
hybridization function Γ(ω) enters G−¹, as can be seen from Eq. (4). The distance function (7), by 
contrast, may be recast as

= 0          (8)
δΣ
where the functional Ωt,U [Σ] is given by
d =  W (ω) Tr
ω
hG′−1
(ω) − G¯−1
(ω)i2
(14)


Ωt,U
[Σ] = FU
[Σ] − Tr ln(−G−¹ + Σ)    (9)
The condition (13) does not entail d = 0, since the lat-ter can only be satisfied with an infinite 
number of bath

G₀t is the noninteracting Green function and FU [Σ] is the Legendre transform of the Luttinger-Ward 
functional Φ[G]:
δΦU
parameters, d being a sum of positive-definite contribu-tions. The SFA solution is therefore not 
self-consistent (G′(ω)  G¯(ω)), but it is, in a variational sense,¹⁹ the best possible 
approximation to the original Hamiltonian by a cluster-bath system.

FU [Σ] = ΦU [G] − Tr(ΣG)  Σ ≡
(10)
δG
If we think of the expression between brackets in (14) as forming a vector in both frequency and 
site index

The value of the functional Ωt,U [Σ] evaluated at the phys-ical self-energy is precisely the grand 
potential Ω of the system. Moreover, the functional FU is universal, in the
space, then the CDMFT tries to make that vector as small as possible, whereas the SFA tries to make 
it or-thogonal to the vector ∂Σ′/∂h, or to make it vanish, the

4


1

0.9

0.8

0.7
0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1




















ωc = 1 
ωc = 2 
ωc = 5 
ωc = 10
SFA








(A)









(C)









(E)




1/ω
tr Σ²     
sharp SFA
exact






1/ω
tr Σ²     
sharp SFA

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
0.15


0.1


0.05


0
1/ω
tr Σ²     
sharp






1/ω
tr Σ²     
sharp SFA






ωc = 1 
ωc = 2 
ωc = 5 
ωc = 10








(B)









(D)









(F)

0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0
µ
0.4  0.6  0.8  1.0  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2.0
µ

FIG. 3. (Color online) Plots illustrating the CDMFT and SFA solutions from the cluster of Fig. 1A, 
for the one-dimensional Hubbard model, all expressed as a function of the chemical potential µ. 
Panel (A): Electron density n (the exact Lieb & Wu result is also shown). Panel (B): SFA gradient 
associated with the various CDMFT solutions. Panel (C) and (D): Hybridization parameters θ1,2 and 
bath energies ε1,2 for the weight functions (15) and the SFA solution. Panel (E) and (F): Bath 
energies ε1,2 for a sharp cutoff (15a) with various values of ωc, and the corresponding values of 
the SFA gradient. Unless indicated otherwise, the cutoff was set at ωc = 2 and the fictitious 
inverse temperature at β = 100.


latter being impossible with a finite bath. Whereas a perfect solution (d = 0) of the 
self-consistency condition would automatically satisfy Condition (13), the converse is not 
necessarily true. The SFA is not the only func-tional formulation from which DMFT can be derived 
(see Ref. 20 for an extensive discussion). However, it has the distinction of being based on an 
exact evaluation of the functional, albeit in a restricted space of parameters.¹⁹





Detailed benchmarks of the SFA approach against the exact solution of half-filled the 
one-dimensional Hubbard model have been performed in Ref. 21, for a large vari-ety of clusters 
(with and without baths). In this work we focus instead on comparing the SFA approach with CDMFT, 
at, and away from, half-filling.
IV. RESULTS

Fig. 1A illustrates a simple bath-cluster system that can be used to approximate the 
one-dimensional Hub-bard model: two cluster sites and four bath sites, with two hybridization 
parameters θ₁,₂ and two bath energies ε₁,₂. The presence of four bath sites (as opposed to two) is 
required in order to have particle-hole symmetry at half-filling. This bath system was used, for 
instance, in Refs 22 and 23.
From a computational point of view, solving the SFA condition (13) is more difficult to carry out 
than the self-consistent CDMFT algorithm of Fig. 2. More instances of the impurity solver must be 
called, and the optimiza-tion of the functional (11) with respect to the bath pa-rameters must be 
very carefully done: it requires great numerical precision and is prone to instabilities, because 
of the relatively weak dependence of Ωt on the bath pa-

5


rameters. Thus, solving the SFA condition (13) can only carried out in practice on small systems 
with few varia-tional parameters, but it sheds light on the proper choice of weighting function W 
to be used in the CDMFT self-consistent procedure.
We have tested the following weight functions W (ω) against the SFA results:
W (iω) = 1 within ω ∈ [0, ωc] (sharp cutoff)   (15a) W (iω) = 1/ω (extra weight to low frequencies) 
(15b) W (iω) = Tr |Σ²(iω)| within ω ∈ [0, ωc]      (15c)
All of these functions have a finite support between ω = 0
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0

1/ω tr Σ² sharp








0    1    2    3    4    5    6
U

and some cutoff frequency iωc, and are evaluated on a grid of Matsubara frequencies defined by a 
‘fictitious’ temperature 1/β (recall that the ED solver is used strictly at zero-temperature in 
this work). Using a range of fre-quencies along a segment parallel to (and slightly above) the real 
axis has also been tried, but gives very unreliable
FIG. 4. (Color online) Gradient of the SFA functional for the various CDMFT weight functions (15). 
Same system as Fig. 3, but this time at half-filling, as a function of U .

-0.5
sharp, →K + V ⟩

results, presumably because the landscape of the distance
function (7) is much more complicated, as the zeros (and poles) of the Green function are located 
on the real axis. Other weight functions W have also been benchmarked,
for instance by putting greater emphasis on low freq√uen-
-0.55
-0.6
-0.65
sharp, Ω + µn
SFA
exact
cies (W (ω) = 1/ω²), or less emphasis (W (ω) = 1/ ω),

or proportional to Tr Σ instead of Tr Σ ². They bring nothing qualitatively different than the 
choices (15) that we benchmark here.
Note that these various distance functions are all in-dependent of the choice of basis used for 
bath or site orbitals: The factor multiplying W in (7) is a matrix trace, and so is choice (15c). 
Choice (15b) is motivated by the desire to give much more weight to low frequen-cies, and Choice 
(15c) by the desire to give more weight
-0.7
-0.75
-0.8
-0.85






0.7  0.75  0.8  0.85  0.9  0.95   1
n

to frequencies with a large self-energy. The cutoff ωc may also be chosen so as to weigh more low 
frequencies.
Fig. 3 summarizes the benchmarks we have conducted on the one-dimensional Hubbard model, using the 
clus-ter illustrated on Fig. 1A, with U = 4 and nearest-neighbor hopping t = 1. Panels (C) and (D) 
show the optimal value of the bath parameter θ₁,₂ and ε₁,₂ as a function of chemical potential 
(within each pair, the two parameters are of course interchangeable, and so there is no point in 
labelling them separately). The SFA re-sult is non-analytic at a value of the chemical poten-tial 
(µc   1.4) corresponding to the edge of the gap in the one-dimensional Hubbard model.  In the range 
µ  [µc, U/2], the SFA values of ε₁ + µ and θ₁ are con-stant, as they should be since the physical 
state of the system is the same for all values of µ within the Mott gap (the same applies to ε₂ and 
θ₂). This supports our view that the SFA provides the best possible values of the bath parameters. 
On the other hand, the bath parame-ters obtained from CDMFT with a sharp cutoff (15a) or a 
self-energy weight (15c) are analytic at µc, even though they follow the general trend of the SFA 
solution. The weight function  1/ω (15b) leads to solutions that show some non-analycity, but 
depart more from the SFA solu-tion than the other two.
FIG. 5. (Color online) Ground state energy density of the one-dimensional Hubbard model, estimated 
in various ways (see text). The exact result is shown for comparison.


Fig. 3B shows the norm of the gradient of the SFA functional (12) evaluated at the CDMFT solutions 
found using the weight functions (15) (this gradient is precisely zero at the SFA solution). This 
can be used as a mea-sure of the departure from the SFA solution, even in cases where the SFA 
solution is not known. Again, the weight functions (15a) and (15c) appear to be the most sensi-ble, 
while the one that enhance low frequencies (15b) has most of the time the largest gradient.
Fig. 3E shows the CDMFT values of the bath energies ε₁,₂, using a sharp cutoff (15a), for different 
values of the cutoff frequency ωc. Panel F shows the SFA gradient for the same set of data. This 
clearly shows that ωc should be small enough, but that ωc = 1 is too small and gives non optimal 
results in the gapped region.  As a rule, the value ωc = 2 provides the best results. One could 
also display the same type of analysis as a function of fictitious temperature β−¹. In that case, 
one can show that the value β = 100 (i.e., a fictitious temperature at 1% of the hopping amplitude 
t) is a good choice, in terms

6


of smoothness and ease of calculation; this is the value that was used in all other plots of this 
paper. On the other hand, β = 20 is definitely too low.
Finally, Fig. 3A shows the CDMFT values of the elec-tron density n, using the weight functions 
(15), as well as the value obtained from the SFA solution and, this time, from Lieb and Wu’s exact 
solution of the one-dimensional Hubbard model²⁴. Again, the weight functions (15a) and (15c) are 
closest on average to the SFA solution. Note however that the latter does not coincide with the 
exact solution and that the weight function (15b) yields a solu-tion that is sometimes closer to 
the exact solution. The SFA solution would move closer to the exact solution if either the number 
of sites or the bath size were increased. But we argue that it provides the best solution for the 
cluster and bath used here, and that it should be the standard against which the different CDMFT 
solutions are compared. We view the occasional close proximity of a CDMFT solution to the exact 
solution as accidental. In particular, the solutions obtained from the low-frequency weight 
function (15b) can be tuned to yield the correct value of the critical chemical potential µc by 
adjusting β, but that does not mean a convergence towards the exact value as β−¹ → 0.
Fig. 4 shows the same type of comparison, this time at
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(A)








(B)








(C)





1/ω
tr Σ²      
sharp VCA

half-filling, as a function of U . Again, the sharp cutoff (15a) and the self-energy weight (15c) 
stand out as the best choices. Note that the gradient goes to zero in the U/t  0 and t/U  0 limits, 
which is natural given that quantum cluster methods such as CDMFT become exact in these limits.
Fig. 5 shows estimates of the ground state energy den-sity E₀ of the 1D Hubbard model as a function 
of density
n. The exact Lieb & Wu result is shown for comparison, as well as the SFA value obtained from the 
optimal value Ω of the functional (12) by the relation E₀ = Ω + µn. For the sharp cutoff (15a), we 
provide estimates of the ground state energy density obtained in two ways: (1) by calculating the 
average K + V , where the average K of the kinetic energy is calculated from the lattice Green 
function G(ω, k), and the average V  of the po-tential energy is calculated from the ground state 
double occupancy at a cluster site; (2) by calculating the func-tional (12) and adding µn. We 
conclude from this graph that method (2) provides a better estimate of the ground state energy than 
method (1), even though the CDMFT solutions are not exact solutions of the variational equa-tions 
(13). The same conclusion is reached with the other weight functions (15).
Let us turn to the two-dimensional Hubbard model, again with nearest-neighbor hopping only. The 
cluster-bath system is illustrated on Fig. 1B. We will start with a discussion of the half-filled 
system, in which case only two bath parameters are necessary because of particle-hole symmetry: a 
hybridization θ (dashed lines on Fig. 1B), and a bath energy  ε (positive on bath sites labelled 5 
through 8, negative on the others). The SFA solution for this system was obtained in Ref. 25 as a 
function of U
3     4     5    6     7     8
U

FIG. 6. (Color online) Top: hybridization parameter θ for the half-filled, two-dimensional Hubbard 
model, with weight functions (15a), compared with the SFA result taken from Ref. 25. Middle panel: 
same for the bath energy ε. Bottom panel: the SFA gradient for the same solutions.


and revealed a Mott transition with two critical values of the Coulomb repulsion (Uc₁ and Uc₂). 
This is illustrated by the full black curve on Fig. 6:  there is an insulat-ing solution at strong 
U that overlaps with a metallic solution as smaller U , and an ‘unstable’ solution linking the two, 
as one would expect for a first-order transition described, e.g., by Landau’s theory of phase 
transitions. The CDMFT solutions that are found for the same prob-lem are shown on Fig. 6 for three 
possible weight func-tions. The Mott transition is visible through an upturn of the bath 
parameters, but no hysteresis was observed: sweeping U upwards or downwards did not make any 
dif-ference. The bottom panel of Fig. 6 shows the SFA gradi-ent calculated from the three CDMFT 
solutions. Overall, the weight function (15c) has the lowest gradient, except exactly at the 
transition; paradoxically, this weight func-tion also best describes the transition: the minimum of 
θ and the sharp upturn in ε occur right between the Uc₁ and Uc₂ found in the SFA, and the changes 
observed near the transistions are the sharpest of the three weight func-tions used. At the Mott 
transition, one would naturally expect a hysteresis loop from CDMFT solutions, or a local increase 
in the SFA gradient due to shift of the so-



0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05



(A)







1/ω
tr Σ²      
sharp
7

and dˆ2 has the corresponding expression for bath sites 9 to 12. The introduction of the pairing 
parameter breaks the conservation of particle number in the cluster-bath system, and anomalous 
averages may be nonzero, which is taken as the signature of superconductivity in the sys-tem. in 
particular, what we call the d-wave order param-eter is the ground-state average of the operator

tr Σ², ωc = 5 
0
Dˆ = ∫ (cos(kₓ) − cos(ky))

ck↑c−k↓ + c−k↑ck↓ + H.c

(B)
0.08
k
where ∫k
(17)
stands for an integral over the original Brillouin

0.06
0.04
0.02






0.8    0.85    0.9    0.95    1
n
zone (along with the appropriate factors of 2π). The av-
erage Dˆ  can be calculated from the lattice Green func-tion G(ω, k) obtained from the CDMFT 
solution.
Fig. 7A shows the d-wave order parameter for the two-dimensional Hubbard model with 
nearest-neighbor hopping t = 1 and on-site repulsion U = 8, as a function of electron density.  We 
only show the hole-doped side, since this system is particle-hole symmetric. The outcome of four 
CDMFT weight functions is plotted.

FIG. 7. (Color online) Top: d-wave order parameter as a function of density in the two-dimensional 
Hubbard model, obtained from CDMFT, with the weight functions (15). Bot-tom: the SFA gradient for 
the same solutions.


lution from the vicinity of the metallic SFA solution to the vicinity of the insulating SFA 
solution. The solution found using the self-energy weight (15c) does precisely that.
Note that the 1/ω weight (15b) seems particularly in-adequate for the metallic solution, which runs 
against the intuition that the 1/ω weight would better describe a state with low-energy states like 
a metal. This is also true of the one-dimensional system described in Fig. 3. However, this is 
naturally understood in the context of the variational equations (13): in the low-frequency limit, 
the self-energy of a Fermi liquid vanishes whereas that of a Mott insulator or pseudo-gapped system 
is large. Thus, if the appropriate weight is to be based somehow on the self-energy, the 1/ω weight 
function should be more ap-propriate for a Mott insulator, not a metal.
Finally, we probe d-wave superconductivity in the two-dimensional Hubbard model.  This is done like 
in Refs 9 and 11, using the cluster-bath system illustrated on Fig. 1B. In this case we used six 
bath parameters: a pair (ε₁, θ₁) of bath energy and hybridization for the ‘first’ bath, made up of 
the orbitals labelled 5 through 8; a similar pair (ε₂, θ₂) for the ‘second’ bath, made up of the 
orbitals labelled 9 through 12; two pairing parameters
(d₁, d₂), multiplying pairing operators dˆ1,2 with d-wave
symmetry, symbolically represented by the dashed curves on Fig. 1B. The exact expression of dˆ1 is
The three weight functions (15) are used with ωc = 2, and in addition a higher cutoff (ωc = 5) is 
used with weight function (15c).  At this point this system is beyond the reach of the SFA, as it 
presents considerable numerical challenges.  However, this does not prevent us from computing the 
SFA gradient once the CDMFT solution is found, and this can be used as a heuristic measure of the 
proximity to the unknown SFA solution. All CDMFT solutions found have superconductivity, and 
roughly in the same range, so the choice of weight function is largely a quantitative, not 
qualitative, issue. The use of a larger cutoff (ωc = 5) can be rejected on the basis that it 
displays the largest SFA gradient of the set (this agrees again with the conclusions drawn from the 
one-dimensional system). The 1/ω weight function (15b) seems more appropriate in the underdoped 
region: it has the lowest SFA gradient there and the largest SC order parameter; this is also where 
the spectral gap is largest (not shown). On the other hand, the sharp cutoff weight (15a) is more 
adequate in the overdoped region, where the SC gap is smaller. This again confirms that the 1/ω 
weight should not be used in a metallic of low-gap phase.



V. CONCLUSION

In the Cellular Dynamical Mean Field Theory, the self-consistency condition G(ω)   G¯(ω) cannot be 
exactly satisfied when using an exact diagonalization solver, be-cause of the small size of the 
bath. In other words, the distance function (7) cannot be made to vanish, but can only be 
minimized. In that case, an ambiguity arises be-

dˆ1

= a₅↑

a6↓

+ a₆↑

a5↓

+ a₇↑

a8↓

+ a₈↑

a7↓

(16)
cause of the arbitrariness in the choice of the weight func-tion W (ω), and this ambiguity 
translates into a variety of

− a5↑a7↓ − a7↑a5↓ − a6↑a8↓ − a8↑a6↓ + H.c
solutions with sometimes important quantitative differ-

8


ences. We argued that Potthoff’s Self-Energy Approach provides the best possible solution for the 
CDMFT bath parameters; in particular, it is non-analytic at the critical value µc of the chemical 
potential that separates the Mott and metallic phases and the bath hybridizations and en-ergies are 
independent of µ within the Mott gap; also, the SFA yields a first-order Mott transition as a 
function of U in two dimensions, which is not seen in the CDMFT solu-tion of the same bath system. 
We benchmarked different weight functions against the solution found in Potthoff’s Self-Energy 
Approach, and argued that the best choices are provided by weight functions that have the lowest 
SFA gradient.  Weight functions that promote low fre-quencies in an ‘exaggerated’ way, e.g. as 1/ω 
(15b), are less adequate for phases with no or weak spectral gap, be-cause the self-energy is small 
at low frequencies in those
phases. We proposed a weight function proportional to the self-energy squared (15c), inspired by 
the role played by the self-energy in the SFA variational condition (13). This new weight function 
is the most successful at de-scribing the U -driven Mott transition in two dimensions. We also 
pointed out that the fictitious temperature used in evaluating the distance function should be 
sufficiently small, β = 100/t being a good rule-of-thumb value.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fruitful discussions with A.-M. Tremblay are gratefully acknowledged. Computational resources were 
provided by RQCHP and Compute Canada.




¹ For a review, see: A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth, and
M. Rozenberg, Rev. Mod. Phys., 68, 13 (1996).
² W. Metzner and D. Vollhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 62, 324 (1989).
³ A. Damascelli, Z. Hussain, and Z.-X. Shen, Rev. Mod. Phys., 75, 473 (2003).
⁴ M. H. Hettler, A. N. Tahvildarzadeh, M. Jarrell, T. Pr-uschke, and H. Krishnamurthy, Phys. Rev. 
B, 58, R7475 (1998).
⁵ M. Hettler, M. Mukherjee, M. Jarrell, and H. Krishna-murthy, Phys. Rev. B, 61, 12739 (2000).
⁶ G. Kotliar, S. Savrasov, G. Pa´lsson, and G. Biroli, Phys. Rev. Lett., 87, 186401 (2001).
⁷ T. A. Maier, M. Jarrell, A. Macridin, and C. Slezak, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 027005 (2004).
⁸ T. A. Maier, M. Jarrell, T. C. Schulthess, P. R. C. Kent, and J. B. White, Phys. Rev. Lett., 95, 
237001 (2005).
⁹ M. Capone and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B, 74 (2006).
¹⁰ K. Haule and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B, 76, 104509 (2007).
¹¹ S. S. Kancharla, M. Civelli, M. Capone, B. Kyung,
D. S´en´echal, G. Kotliar, and A.-M. Tremblay, Phys. Rev. B, 77, 184516 (2008).
¹² M. Civelli, Phys. Rev. B, 79, 195113 (2009).
¹³ M. Caffarel and W. Krauth, Phys. Rev. Lett., 72, 1545 (1994).
¹⁴ E. Gull, P. Werner, O. Parcollet, and M. Troyer, Europhys. Lett., 82 (2008).
¹⁵ E. Koch, G. Sangiovanni, and O. Gunnarsson, Phys. Rev. B, 78, 115102 (2008).
¹⁶ A. Liebsch and N.-H. Tong, Phys. Rev. B, 80, 165126 (2009).
¹⁷ D. S´en´echal, “An introduction to quantum cluster meth-ods,” Lecture notes from the CIFAR - 
PITP Interna-tional Summer School on Numerical Methods for Corre-lated Systems in Condensed Matter, 
Sherbrooke, Canada, arXiv:0806.2690 (2008).
¹⁸ M. Potthoff, Eur. Phys. J. B, 32, 429 (2003).
¹⁹ M. Potthoff, Adv. Solid State Phys., 45, 135 (2005).
²⁰ G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko,
O. Parcollet, and C. A. Marianetti, Reviews of Modern Physics, 78, 865 (2006).
²¹ M. Balzer, W. Hanke, and M. Potthoff, Phys. Rev. B, 77, 045133 (2008).
²² M. Capone, M. Civelli, S. S. Kancharla, C. Castellani, and
G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B, 69, 195105 (2004).
²³ A. Go and G. S. Jeon, J. Phys. Cond. Matt., 21 (2009).
²⁴ E. H. Lieb and F. Y. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 20, 1445 (1968).
²⁵ M. Balzer, B. Kyung, D. S´en´echal, A. M. S. Tremblay, and
M. Potthoff, Europhys. Lett., 85, 17002 (2009).
