Effect of the Coulomb repulsion and oxygen level on charge distribution and superconductivity in 
the Emery model for cuprates superconductors.
Louis-Bernard St-Cyr¹ and David Sénéchal¹
¹Département de physique and Institut quantique, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, 
Canada J1K 2R1
(Dated: March 12, 2025)
The Emery model (aka the three-band Hubbard model) offers a simplified description of the 
copper-oxide planes that form the building blocks of high-temperature superconductors. By contrast 
with the even simpler one-band Hubbard model, it differentiates between copper and oxygen orbitals 
and thus between oxygen occupation (np) and copper occupation (nd ). Here we demonstrate, using 
cluster dynamical mean field theory, how the two occupations are related to the on-site Coulomb 
repulsion U on the copper orbital and to the energy difference εp between oxygen and copper 
orbitals. Since the occupations (np and nd ) have been estimated from NMR for a few materials (LCO, 
YBCO and NCCO), this allows us to estimate the value of U  εp for these materials, within this 
model. We compute the density of states for these and the effect of (U , εp ) on the nd -np curve, 
superconductivity, and antiferromagnetism.


I. INTRODUCTION

High-temperature superconductors, nearly forty years af-ter their discovery, still constitute a 
theoretical challenge. The dozens of materials in this category all share a com-





−tpp
′
pp

−
+
tpd
+
− −  − +

mon feature:  planes of copper oxide (CuO₂).  Thus one would naturally expect a universal 
explanation of super-conductivity in cuprates based on a model of these planes only. The one-band 
Hubbard model has long been the fo-cus of research in this direction, in part because of its 
rel-ative simplicity: a few hopping parameters, the Coulomb repulsion U and the chemical potential 
controlling the elec-


2py
tpp





2pₓ
+
−tpd



′
pp
−tpp
tpp

tron density. That model features a single band crossing the Fermi level, argued to be a 
combination of copper dₓ2 y2 and oxygen pₓ and py orbitals, forming excitations above
what we call the Zhang-Rice singlet [1]. Various theoret-ical approaches applied to this model have 
provided evi-dence for a dome of d-wave superconductivity away from half-filling, in addition to a 
robust antiferromagnetic phase close to half-filling [2–6], although there is also evidence, in 
some parameter range, that superconductivity is not the lowest-energy state [7, 8].
A more realistic description of the CuO₂ planes is pro-vided by the Emery-VSA 
(Varma-Schmitt-Rink-Abrahams) model [9, 10], which involves the copper dₓ2 y2 orbital and two 
oxygen p-orbitals per unit cell. Within that model,
the question of the distribution of holes between the cop-per and oxygen orbitals now has meaning. 
Since the oc-cupation of both orbitals can be estimated from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
experiments [11], a compari-son with NMR data can in principle be used to impose con-straints on 
some of the parameters of that model, namely the on-site Coulomb interaction on the copper orbitals 
and the energy levels of both orbitals. This is what this paper is mainly about. This will also 
lead us to revisit the relation of superconductivity with U and the matter of localized vs 
itinerant antiferromagnetism in NCCO.
This paper is organized as follow: In Sect. II we review the definition of the Emery model and the 
method used (Cluster dynamical mean-field theory or CDMFT). The lat-ter is mostly discussed in the 
Appendix. In Sect. III we
3dₓ2 −y2


Figure 1. Schematic representation of the Emery model used in this work: Copper dₓ2 y2 orbitals are 
shown in red and Oxygen pₓ ,py orbitals in blue. Nonzero hopping parameters are indicated. The gray 
square defines the unit cell, and the beige square the super unit cell used in CDMFT (see 
appendix).


present our numerical results for the relative hole and elec-tron distribution among the Cu and O 
orbitals as a function of doping, interaction strength U and oxygen energy level εp . We also show 
the effect of these parameters on the su-perconducting order parameter at zero temperature and we 
compare the charge-distribution curves with those of real materials obtained from NMR. Finally in 
Sect. IV we dis-cuss the applicability of the Emery model to these materials and conclude.



II. MODEL AND METHOD

A. The Emery model

Let us first review the basics of the Emery model. It is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. In 
second-quantized lan-guage, the kinetic energy Hkin. and interaction Hint. are ex-

2


pressed as follows:

Hkin. =   (εp  µ)(nr+ax
r,σ


+ nr₊ₐy ) − µnr
in energy between the oxygen and copper orbital and the energy εd of the copper orbital is used as 
reference. tpd is the first-neighbor hopping amplitude between a copper and the oxygen orbitals 
that are directly around it. tpp is the

+ tpd X X
X 𝑐d† pr₊𝑐ₐ,σ + H.c
hopping amplitude between two nearest-neighbor oxygen orbitals (diagonally) and t′pp is the 
third-neighbor hopping

r a=aₓ ,ay 𝑐=±1
amplitude between two oxygen orbitals over a copper or-


+ tpp
r
𝑐,𝑐X= 1

†
r+𝑐aₓ ,σ

pr+𝑐′ ay ,σ + H.c
bital. The sign convention for the hopping parameters used in this work is illustrated in Fig. 1. U 
represents the energy


+ t′pp
Xr a=Xaₓ ,ay

p†
r−a,σ

pr+a,σ
+ H.c}   (1)
cost of double occupancy caused by the Coulomb repulsion between electrons located on the same 
copper orbital. The corresponding local repulsion Up on the oxygen orbitals is neglected because of 
its smaller value, as justified by density


Hint.
= U  nr
r

nr↓
,        (2)
functional theory (DFT)[12], and also because the oxygen orbitals are nearly filled in the cases of 
interest. The chemi-cal potential µ allows to control the filling (electron or hole

where r labels the position of the copper atoms and 2aₓ = 2ay are the Bravais square lattice 
vectors. The operator dr,σ annihilates an electron of spin σ on the copper 3dₓ2 −y2 or-
doping) of the system.
We can express the kinetic part Hkin. more compactly in reciprocal space:

bital located at the position r. The operator pr₊ₐ,σ annihi-lates an electron of spin σ on the 
oxygen 2pₓ or 2py orbital

Hkin.
†
k,σ
hkΦ

k,σ
(3)

located at r + aₓ,y . nr,σ
†
r,σ
dr,σ
is the number of elec-                ᵏσ

trons of spin σ in the Cu orbital at site r, whereas nr₊ₐx and
where the different annihilation operators are assembled in
nr₊ₐy are the number of electrons (summed over spins) on   the multiplet Φk,σ = (dkσ  x   k         
× 3 matrix hk
σ) and the 3
each of the oxygen orbitals. εp represents the difference  is

   0       tpd (1 − e−ⁱᵏx )      tpd (1 − e−ⁱᵏy )   
hk =  tpd (1 − eⁱᵏx )   εp + 2t′pp cos kₓ   tpp(1 − eⁱᵏx )(1 − e−ⁱᵏy )  .             (4)
tpd (1 − eⁱᵏy ) tpp(1 − e−ⁱᵏx )(1 − eⁱᵏy )   εp + 2t′pp cos ky



Note that we did not renormalize εp by including the  2tpp contribution of the oxygen orbital 
energy, in contrast with Ref. [13].
Since the unit cell contains three orbitals, the maximum occupation is n = 6. The “half-filling” 
state is set to five electrons per unit cell, with the O orbitals being fully filled and the Cu 
orbital half-filled, in the zero-hopping limit. At finite hopping the O orbitals are slightly less 
than fully filled and the Cu orbital is slightly more than half-filled [11]. Such an undoped state 
describes a charge transfer insula-tor (CTI) when the interaction U is large enough to split the Cu 
energy band into an upper (UHB) and lower (LHB) Hubbard band [14]. At those large U values, the UHB 
is pushed past the energy of the oxygen band, also called the charge-transfer band (CTB). Partial 
holes on the O orbitals cause a loss of electronic weight in the CTB and give rise to the 
Zhang-Rice singlet band (ZRB) [1] made of low-energy states formed by the mixing of Cu and 
neighboring O or-bitals. In a CTI, an insulating gap, called a charge transfer gap (CTG), is formed 
between the ZRB and the UHB upon increasing U . This CTG in the Emery model is the analog of the 
Mott gap in a Mott insulator (MI). The different spectral features of the Emery model are 
illustrated in the density of
states of Fig. 6a below.
Finally, a note on double counting. The relative energy level εp between O and Cu orbitals computed 
from DFT is subject to a renormalization when the Coulomb inter-action U is introduced. Indeed, 
Coulomb interactions are already taken into account at the DFT level and impact the value of εp . 
When U is introduced in an explicit way in the Emery model, the DFT effect of that local Coulomb 
in-teraction should be subtracted in order to avoid counting it twice. This of course is rather 
difficult to evaluate exactly. A rough estimate of this double counting can be obtained by 
computing the effect of U at the mean-field (Hartree) level, i.e., by replacing
Unr↑nr↓ by U n¯r↑nr↓ + nr↑n¯r↓ − n¯r↑n¯r↓ ,  (5)
where n¯rσ is the occupation of the Cu orbital of spin σ at site
r. In the paramagnetic state, n¯r = n¯r and this brings a con-
tribution ¹ U n¯r to the copper orbital energy εd that must be subtracted, which leads to a 
corresponding correction ¹ U n¯r to εp since εd is used as the reference energy. Such a cor-rection 
was already applied in Refs [15, 16] but manifestly
depends on U . Hence one cannot set U in the model with-out also playing with εp . This is why in 
the following we



study both the effect of U and εp on the properties of the model.






B. Cluster dynamical mean-field theory


In this work we approximately solve the Emery model using cluster dynamical mean field theory 
(CDMFT) [17, 18] with an exact diagonalization (ED) impurity solver at zero temperature, 
implemented in the open-source library Pyqcm [19]. CDMFT is an extension of dynamical mean
3


Table I. Hopping parameters used in this work, from Refs [15, 16].
Material   tpd /tpp    t′pp /tpp   (εp  εd )/tpp
BSSCO    2.139    0.258    2.01
LSCO     2.172   0.1609    4.08
YBCO     1.902    0.223    3.05
NCCO     2.148    0.389    2.98
III. RESULTS
A. Doping curves
The effect of U and εp on the distribution of holes and

field theory (DMFT). DMFT is an embedding procedure that incorporates the correlations of a single 
correlated orbital with its lattice environment into a hybridization of that orbital with a set of 
non-interacting orbitals (the “bath”). DMFT assumes that the self-energy is purely local, i.e., its 
momentum dependence is neglected. To include the latter,
which is essential to describe dₓ2 y2 superconductivity in cuprates, we need to upgrade the 
single-site impurity prob-lem (DMFT) into a cluster impurity problem (CDMFT), in which a four-site 
cluster of Cu atoms is embedded into an
effective environment. In this work the decomposition of the infinite lattice into clusters is done 
in the same way as in Ref. [20]: the lattice is tiled with identical units, each of which 
consisting of a cluster of Nd = 4 correlated Cu sites and another, overlapping cluster of NO = 8 
uncorrelated oxygen sites, as shown in Fig. 1. The correlated Cu cluster is augmented by an 
8-orbital bath that represents that clus-ter’s environment, and defines an “impurity problem”. See 
Appendix A for technical details.
electrons in the Emery model can be seen by plotting the
occupation of O orbitals against that of the Cu orbital. We have computed the distribution of 
electrons and holes for a range of values of U and εp in a model of Bi₂Sr₂Ca₂Cu₃O₁₀ (BSCCO) as 
shown in Fig. 2. The hopping parameters are taken from ref. [15]. Note that we also obtained 
solutions on the “wrong” side of half-filling for this material (and for others in this paper), 
i.e, for both hole and electron doping, irrespective of its actual hole- or electron-doped 
character.
Let nd (np) denote the average occupation of copper (oxygen) orbitals. In Fig. 2, one notices a 
discontinuity in the slope ¹ dnd /dnp of the curves at half-filling, i.e., along the diagonal gray 
line defined by nd + 2np = 5. This dis-continuity occurs for all curves with U > 9 on the figure 
and is a signature of the charge transfer gap (CTG). On the hole-doped side, the smaller slope 
indicates that the hole density increases faster on the O orbitals than on the Cu orbital when 
removing electrons. By contrast, the slope on the electron-doped side indicates that the doped 
electrons mostly go to the Cu orbital. Note from Fig. 2a that the slope discontinuity between the 
electron- and hole-doped sides of the curve increases with U , that is, as U gets stronger, the

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5







e-doped


U = 8, εp = 2
U = 9, εp = 2
h-doped







e-doped



U = 10, εp = 2
h-doped
doped hole (electrons) go increasingly towards the O (Cu) orbitals. Both of these observations are 
in agreement with experimental data [21, 22] (see Fig. 5) and with theoreti-cal calculations using 
a different impurity solver [23, 24]. In the atomic limit, i.e., when setting all hopping terms to 
zero (but keeping εp ), the corresponding curve would fol-low the np = 2 axis on the electron-doped 
side, and the nd = 1 axis on the hole-doped side (orange lines on the

0.4

0.3
U = 9.5, εp = 2 U = 11, εp = 2 U = 12, εp = 2


(a)
U = 12, εp = 4 U = 14, εp = 6 U = 16, εp = 8


(b)
figure). At lower values of U , crossing the half-filling axis has no effect on the slope of the 
curve, corresponding to a continuously hybridized Cu-O band at the Fermi level.

0.2
0.0     0.2     0.4
4 − 2np
0.0     0.2     0.4
4 − 2np
In the zero-hopping limit, the CTG gap is precisely ∆n = U  εp . We will call this the nominal gap, 
as opposed to the real CTG gap obtained from the computed density of

Figure 2. Relative filling nd of copper and np of oxygen in a model for Bi₂Sr₂Ca2Cu₃O₁₀. Panel (a): 
the effect of U for a fixed value of εp . Panel (b): the effect of U when the nominal gap U  εp is 
kept constant. The gray line sits at half-filling and the blue lines at ±15% doping. The orange 
lines show the zero-hopping limit.
states when hopping is present. The actual CTG is much smaller than U  εp because of the finite 
bandwidth in the presence of hopping. From Fig. 2b, one sees that increasing εp while keeping the 
nominal gap U  εp constant barely af-fects the position of the curve along the half-filling line 
and makes the curves flatter on the hole-doped side while hav-ing no effect on the electron-doped 
side. Indeed, increasing

4


εp pushes the lower Hubbard band to even lower energies, thus making the charge transfer band even 
more dominated by the oxygens and removing copper content from the ZRS band. Hence added holes go 
more and more on the oxy-gen atoms. On the other hand, that increase has apparently much less 
effect on the oxygen content of the upper Hub-bard band, because the relative location of the UHB 
and the


2.5


2.0


1.5

(a)
8
2
6
4  2



2  2

2  0.17

0.16
J
0.15

0.14 2

2
(b)        4  2
2
2

CTB remains roughly the same, and so does the actual CTG. We conclude from this that the ZRS band 
gets its Cu content from both the lower and upper Hubbard bands.
0.25




0.05
Ψmax
0.04


(c)
8     9    10
U − εp

2




2




0.05
Ψmax
0.04
0.10  0.11  0.12  0.13
(U − εp )−¹
(d)           2
2

0.20
U = 8, εp = 2 U = 9, εp = 2 U = 9.5, εp = 2
U = 11, εp = 2
U = 12, εp = 2
0.03
2
2  4              2   4
2                 2
6    0.03           6
8        2          8

0.15

0.10
0.14  0.15  0.16  0.17
J
0.10  0.11  0.12  0.13
(U − εp )−¹



0.05

0.00
0.25

0.20

0.15







U = 10, εp = 2
U = 12, εp = 4







U = 14, εp = 6
U = 16, εp = 8
Figure 4. Various properties of the Emery model computed from CDMFT and the parameters used for 
BSCCO in Fig. 2. Panel (a) shows the CTG computed from the density of states, as a func-tion of U  
εp . Panel (b) shows the superexchange estimate J as a function of (U  εp )−¹. Panel (c) shows the 
maximum supercon-
ducting order parameter on the hole-doped side (see Fig. 3) as a
function of the superexchange J at half-filling, and Panel (d) the same quantity as a function of 
(U  εp )−¹. The value of εp is writ-ten next to each data point.


0.10

0.05

0.00
−0.5  −0.4  −0.3  −0.2  −0.1   0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3
Figure 3. d-wave superconducting order parameter vs electron-doping x in a models for BSCCO with 
varying U at fixed εp (top) and varying U at constant CTG, i.e., varying εp (bottom).
B. Superconductivity
Fig. 3 shows the d-wave superconducting order parame-ter Ψ, the average of the pairing operator 
(A13), as a func-tion of electron doping x (negative for hole doping) for the same values of U and 
εp as in Fig. 2. On the top panel, U is varied while
In Ref. [20] it was argued that the main factor influenc-ing Ψmax was the effective super-exchange 
J computed at half-filling. This quantity is computed on the impurity (the four-site plaquette) and 
is the position of the first (domi-nant) pole in the dynamic antiferromagnetic spin suscep-tibility 
as a function of frequency [20, 25]. Fig. 4b shows how J depends on the inverse nominal gap, 
whereas Fig. 4c shows how Ψmax is related to J . As can be seen, the relation between the two is 
roughly linear for fixed εp = 2 until the CTG almost closes. The linear relation also holds as a 
func-tion of the inverse nominal gap (Fig. 4d). Note that the data shown in red, with constant 
nominal gap, corresponds to a single value of J , but a sizeable variation of Ψmax, demon-strating 
that J is not the only factor at play.
Interestingly, all curves of Ψ with a nonzero CTG also show a discontinuity in the hole-doped 
region, that appears at optimal doping, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This discontinu-ity within the 
superconducting phase was also observed in Refs [20, 26] and marks the boundary between a supercon-

εp is kept constant, whereas in the bottom
panel U is varied while U  εp is kept constant. We first note that superconductivity exists even 
when the CTG vanishes (U = 8 and U = 9). It is even at its maximum at half-filling just under the 
Mott transition (U = 9), but shifts to-wards the hole-doped region as U is lowered to U = 8. Note 
that these calculations ignore the presence of antiferromag-netism near half-filling. In all cases, 
the maximum order parameter Ψmax on the electron-doped side is not affected by U or εp , whereas it 
decreases with U on the hole-doped side, although less markedly if the nominal gap U  εp is kept 
constant.
ducting phase with and without pseudogap.


C. Comparison with NMR

We studied three different cuprate compounds and com-puted the hole distribution between oxygen and 
copper sites in the superconducting phase, with the goal of estimat-ing the strengths of the 
Coulomb interaction U and of the orbital energy εp in those materials. We looked at two hole-doped 
cuprates, La₂CuO₄ (LCO) and YBa₂Cu₃O₇ (YBCO),

5


1.0

0.9

0.8


hole-doped


LCO U = 14, εp = 4 LCO U = 20, εp = 10 YBCO U = 9, εp = 3
0.3


0.2

(a)           Cu
LCO            Ox
U = 14, εp = 4


0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4





∆n = 10








∆n = 6









∆n = 5
NCCO U = 8, εp = 3 NCCO U = 12, εp = 7
LCO (exp.) YBCO (exp.) NCCO (exp.) atomic limit


0.1


0.0
0.3
LHB        ZRB

CTB
CTG UHB


(b)


0.3
electron-doped
0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
4 − 2np
0.2
0.1
YBCO
U = 9, εp = 3

Figure 5. Relative filling nd of Cu np of O orbitals. NMR data from [11] (squares) compared with 
our CDMFT results for LCO, YBCO and NCCO. The orange lines are the zero-hopping limit of the Emery 
model. The values of the nominal gap ∆n = U  εp are indicated.
using the hopping parameters from Ref. [15] given in Ta-ble I, and varying also εp from the values 
of that table. We also looked at one electron-doped cuprate, Nd₂CuO₄ (NCCO), using the band 
parameters from Ref. [16]. We compare in Fig. 5 the hole distributions of these three ma-terials 
computed from CDMFT with the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data from Ref. [11]. For each of the 
three


0.0
0.3


0.2


0.1


0.0



(c)
NCCO
U = 8, εp = 3






−20   −15   −10   −5   0    5



materials, we computed the doping curves for many values of U and the value of εp of Table I. We 
show in Fig. 5 only those curves that cross half-filling closest to their respec-tive experimental 
data points. We also show doping curves (small open symbols) for larger values of U and 
correspond-ingly larger values of εp for LCO and NCCO, thus keeping the nominal gap ∆n = U  εp 
constant.
Fig. 6 shows the computed density of states (DoS) at half-
filling for each of the three materials studied, with the val-ues of U corresponding to the full 
circles in Fig. 5. We see that LCO has a large CTG of approximately 3.5tpp (panel (a)), whereas in 
YBCO this gap is only about 1.0tpp (panel (b)) and in NCCO the CTG has disappeared (panel (c)). The 
absence of gap at the Fermi level for NCCO was also pre-dicted by a hybrid DFT-DMFT study [16] in 
the case where long range magnetic order is not allowed, like here.
We do not observe a superconducting dome on the elec-tron doped side in NCCO, rather like the U = 8 
curve for BSCCO in Fig. 3a, even though there should be one as the material is superconducting. As 
we mentioned before, DMFT+LDA computations on a similar model showed that by allowing long range 
magnetic order a gap should open up around the Fermi level at half-filling [16]. We modified the 
impurity model (A2) in order to allow for antiferromag-netic order, to see wether a CTG would 
appear for NCCO at U = 8.0. To measure the strength of the antiferromagnetic order we defined the 
order parameter
Figure 6. Density of states for the solutions crossing the half-filling axis of Fig. 5 for each of 
the three cuprate compounds. The Fermi level is the vertical red line. The Cu contribution is shown 
in red and the contribution of one of the oxygen orbitals in blue (the two oxygens contribute equal 
amounts).


(U , εp ) = (8.0, 3) only a weak antiferromagnetic order was observed, which was not strong enough 
to open a CTG. We then studied the relationship between the value of interac-tion U and the 
antiferromagnetic order parameter, as shown in Fig. 7. We notice a discontinuity in the value of  M 
in between U  9.06 and U  8.90. This discontinuity is characterized by the opening of an 
antiferromagnetic order-induced CTG at the Fermi level, as can be seen from Fig. 8. The nature of 
antiferromagnetism goes from local to itiner-ant as U is decreased across this discontinuity.


IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Comparing the hole distribution data from NMR and CDMFT should in principle allow us to set the 
interaction strength U and the relative band energy εp in the Emery model. Knowing band parameters 
from first-principles cal-culations, one can produce curves similar to Fig. 2 and ap-proximately 
identify the right U −εp by looking at the inter-

M =  eQ·ʳ(nr
r
− nr↓
)       (6)
section of their curves with the half-filling axis and compare it with a NMR measurement on the 
undoped compound, like in Fig. 5. Ideally, (nd , np) NMR data and the CDMFT

with the antiferromagnetic wave-vector Q = (𝑢, 𝑢). At
results would have the same slope away from half-filling.

6




0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0








εp = 3 NCCO (half-filling)
8     9     10    11    12
U
values U = 20 and εp = 10 (open blue circles in Fig. 5): A larger value of εp lowers the 
hybridization of the Cu and O bands and produces a flatter curve. Maybe also our neglect of the 
local Coulomb interactions on the oxygens (Up) is to blame, as its importance will grow with hole 
doping. Fi-nally, this may just be an inherent insufficiency of the Emery model to describe the 
actual material, which only a treat-ment of all orbitals could resolve, in the line of Ref. [27].
More serious is the disagreement between the data for NCCO (open red squares on Fig. 5) and the 
model’s predic-tions on the electron-doped side. The NMR data consists of two points only, but 
these two points hint at a rather large

Figure 7. Amplitude of the antiferromagnetic order parameter of
NCCO at half-filling in relation to the interaction strength U .
value of dnd /dnp, as if the upper Hubbard band contained little oxygen, even though the values of 
U and εp are such that the CTG vanishes.

0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0
0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0
0.6


0.4


0.2


0.0

(a) U=9.06 (normal)










(b) U=9.06 (AF)










(c) U=8.89 (AF)
The value U  εp = 5 for NCCO, as determined by the Cu        position of (np, nd ) at half-filling, 
was not large enough to Ox         open a CTG even when allowing long range antiferromag-netic 
order. Figs 7 and 8 show that a CTG opens up at the
Fermi level between U = 8.90 and U = 9.06 for εp = 3, leading to a jump in the AF order parameter M 
. Knowing that NCCO is a superconductor, we should observe a non-negligible value of the SC order 
parameter Ψ at U  εp = 5 if it is indeed the right value to describe NCCO in the Emery model, but 
we don’t (not shown). We are clearly underesti-mating the value of U  εp in that case. For 
hole-doped com-pounds, which are commonly believed to possess greater U values than their 
electron-doped counterparts [16, 28], this underestimation is less of a problem since they stand 
further from the transition between a CTI and a metal. As for the electron-doped cuprates, some 
argue that they are simply not in the CTI regime [16]. This also points towards a possible (small) 
disconnect between the computation of densities and that of the SC order parameter, the latter 
be-ing more affected by the finite size of the cluster since it is less of a local quantity: 
neglecting inter-cluster components of the anomalous self-energy has more consequences when 
computing Ψ.
Let us point out some deficiencies of the Emery model or
of our treatment thereof:

−20   −15   −10   −5    0    5



Figure 8. DoS of NCCO in the normal phase in which we allowed for long range antiferromagnetic 
order. The two values of interac-tion U shown are the values on the border of the discontinuity in 
Fig. 7.


From Fig. 5 one sees that this is not exactly the case, al-though the agreement for YBCO is 
satisfactory given the dispersion of NMR data.
In LCO, the slope from the 4 NMR data points is smaller than predicted by CDMFT for εp = 4. This 
behavior indi-cates that the O and Cu orbitals are actually less hybridized than the DFT-derived 
parameters of the Emery model lead us to believe. There could be many causes. Maybe the value of εp 
is actually larger than predicted by DFT. Indeed, our results are closer to the mark if we adopt 
the more extreme
1. In principle one could construct a tight-binding model that fits the DFT band structure 
perfectly, with a large-enough number of orbitals. The Emery model keeps only three of them, hence 
some hydbridization with other bands is lost and this will affect the occupation numbers nd and np, 
especially if we venture too far from half-filling, the usual operating point at which the model 
parameters are derived.
2. In the model itself, we have neglected all interactions but the on-site interaction U on copper 
orbitals, ef-fectively treating other orbitals in the mean-field ap-proximation. Since the 
occupation np of oxygens is close to 2, this is not such a bad approximation (fluc-tuations of 
these interactions are small) but it is less and less valid as hole-doping increases.
3. The value of εp , as insisted upon above, is strongly renormalized by the interaction, so much 
so that it is

7


better to treat it as an adjustable parameter. However, that renormalization is doping dependent, 
and this was ignored here.
Despite these shortcomings, the Emery model achieves a lot [20]: it reproduces the correlation 
between super-
the energy of a bath orbital and the θrα are elements of the hybridization matrix that allows 
electrons to hop between cluster and bath orbitals. The effect of the bath environ-ment on the 
electron Green function is contained in the hy-bridization function:

conductivity and superexchange[29], charge transfer gap
[30, 31] and oxygen hole doping [22].

𝑇rr′
(ω) = X θrαθr∗′ α
	

(A5)

pation np and copper occupation nd can help determine the degree of correlation U  εp in the model 
and set this param-eter combination from observations. This works reason-ably well for the 
hole-doped cuprates LSCO (U  εp = 10) and YBCO (U  εp = 6), but less so for the electron-doped 
cuprate NCCO. In the latter case, U  εp may be strongly un-derestimated, or the weaker correlations 
make the CDMFT approach used here less accurate.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fruitful conversations with A.-M. S. Tremblay are grate-fully acknowledged. This work has been 
financially sup-ported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Grants 
No. RGPIN-2020-05060) and by the Canada First Research Excellence Fund. Computational resources 
were provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada and Calcul Québec.


Appendix A: Cluster dynamical mean-field theory

In the appendix we review some technical details of clus-ter dynamical mean field theory (CDMFT) 
[32, 33] as ap-
We can extract the correlated cluster’s self-energy Σc from the Cu orbital Green function obtained 
via ED through Dyson’s equation:
G−c 1(ω) = ω − t − Γ(ω) − Σc (ω).    (A6)
Here Gc is the exact 8  8 Green function of the Cu or-bitals on the correlated cluster (8 because 
of spin). The self-energy is solely associated to the Cu cluster since we neglect correlation on 
the O orbitals. From this self-energy, we construct an approximation to the Green function of the 
infinite system
G−¹(k˜, ω) = G0−1(k˜, ω) − Σc (ω).    (A7)
Where G0−1 is the non-interacting part of the lattice Green function and k˜ is the reduced wave 
vector in the Brillouin zone of the super-lattice of repeated clusters. Here G0−1(k˜) is a 24  24 
matrix, since it also contains the contribution
of the oxygen orbitals, and Σc has been padded with zeros from 8  8 to 24  24 to include the null 
contribution of the oxygen orbitals to the self-energy. From this expression, we can in turn 
calculate the local Green function:
G¯ (ω) =  L X     1     .     (A8)

plied to our problem. General reviews of CDMFT may be found in Refs [19, 34]. We define an impurity 
problem con-
N k˜ G0−1(k˜) − Σc (ω)

sisting of 4 unit cells of the Emery model, which we further decompose into a 4-site, correlated 
cluster of Cu dₓ2 y2 or-bitals, plus an 8-site, uncorrelated cluster of O p orbitals.
The correlated Cu cluster is augmented by an 8-orbital bath that represents that cluster’s 
environment, and defines an “impurity problem” whose Hamiltonian is
The goal of CDMFT is then, through self-consistency, to ob-tain a local Green function that is 
equal to the exactly-solved Green function of the cluster: Gc (ω) = G¯ (ω), when re-stricted to the 
correlated (Cu) degrees of freedom. With a finite number of bath orbitals, it is impossible for 
those two functions to coincide perfectly at all frequencies. A dis-

Himp
= Hclus
+ Hbath
+ Hhyb
,     (A1)
tance function is then defined to minimize the difference between the two solutions:

with the following partial Hamiltonians:
d = X

W (G−¹(iω ) G−¹(iω ))

²   (A9)

Hclus = U X nr nr
− X trr c† cr

(A2)
n  c   n
iωn ,𝑐,𝑐′
n 𝑐𝑐

r  ↑ ↓
X
	


r,r′ ,σ
′ rσ σ
(again, in the above equation, G¯ −1 is restricted to the Cu

Hhyb = X θrα(c† bασ + H.c)      (A4)
weights Wn that are usually taken to be constant up to some

rσ
r,α,σ

The index r stands for site within the cluster and α is the bath orbital index. The trr′ are 
elements of the cluster hop-ping matrix t, crσ and bασ are destruction operators on clus-ter and 
bath orbitals, respectively, for spin σ =↑, ↓. ϵα is
cutoff frequency ωc . The distance function is minimized with the help of some minimization method 
(here we use the Nelder-Mead algorithm [35]), varying the bath param-eters, ϵα and θµα. The newly 
obtained bath parameters are then used to update the impurity model, and the procedure is iterated 
until convergence.

8


Once a self-consistent local Green function has been found, different observables of the system can 
be computed. Consider for instance a general one-body operator Sˆ:
Sˆ = X sαβ c† cβ .       (A10)
We then use the Nambu formalism, which here amounts to a particle-hole transformation on the 
spin-down part of the problem and allows to formulate the problem in the same Green function 
language as in the normal solution. The Nambu off-diagonal blocks of the Green function and 
self-energy then contain the anomalous parts of these quanti-

αβ                   ties. A superconducting order parameter with d
x 2 −y2
sym-

The ground state expectation value of such an operator is [19]
metry is then defined as Ψ = ∆ˆ /N with N the number of unit cells in the lattice and the singlet 
pairing operator ∆ˆ defined as:
S¯  , ∞ dω d2k˜  tr s k˜ G k˜,    tr s(k˜) } , (A11) ∆ˆ = X (dr↑dr′ ↓ − dr↓dr′ ↑) − X (dr↑dr′ ↓ − 
dr↓dr′ ↑) + H.c ,

= −∞ 2𝑢 (2𝑢)2
( ) (
ω) − iω − p

〈rr′〉ₓ

〈rr′〉y

(A13)

where convergence is ensured by the subtraction of a pole p located on the positive real axis, if 
tr s = 0. The expression (A11) is mainly used in this work to compute the electronic (hole) density 
on Cu and O sites in the unit cell of the model illustrated in Fig. 1.
In this work, we also probe the superconducting state. In that case the impurity model (A2) needs 
to be upgraded by adding pairing between cluster and bath:
with rr′ ₓ and rr′ y nearest neighbor copper orbitals in the x and y directions, respectively.
Finally, let us point out that the use of an impurity solver based on exact diagonalization (ED), 
even though limited to small systems sizes, and in particular a discrete bath, has the advantage 
over quantum Monte Carlo methods that it is not plagued by the fermion sign problem. The latter 
only gets worse while studying covalent (low values of εp ) com-pounds compared to ionic compounds. 
Since cuprates are

H   X s  c b



c b  H.c

.   (A12)
definitey covalent [15], the use of an ED solver is of great





[1] F. C. Zhang and T. M. Rice, Effective Hamiltonian for the su-perconducting Cu oxides, Phys. 
Rev. B 37, 3759 (1988).
[2] E. Gull and A. J. Millis, Numerical models come of age, Na-ture Physics 11, 808 (2015).
[3] E. Pavarini and I. for Advanced Simulation, eds., Emergent phenomena in correlated matter: 
lecture notes of the Au-tumn School on Correlated Electrons 2013 at Forschungszen-trum Jülich, 23 – 
27 September 2013, Schriften des Forschungszentrums Jülich Reihe Modeling and Simula-tion No. 3 
(Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, 2013) meet-ing Name: Autumn School Correlated Electrons OCLC: 
862816584.
[4] H. Alloul, What is the simplest model that captures the basic experimental facts of the physics 
of underdoped cuprates?, Comptes Rendus Physique 15, 519–524 (2014).
[5] D. Sénéchal, P. L. Lavertu, M. a. Marois, and A.M.. Trem-blay, Competition between 
antiferromagnetism and super-conductivity in high-Tc cuprates, Physical Review Letters 94, 156404 
(2005).
[6] A. Foley, S. Verret, A.-M. S. Tremblay, and D. Sénéchal, Coex-istence of superconductivity and 
antiferromagnetism in the Hubbard model for cuprates, Physical Review B 99, 184510 (2019).
[7] E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada, Colloquium: Theory of intertwined orders in 
high temperature supercon-ductors, Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 457 (2015).
[8] M. Qin, C.-M. Chung, H. Shi, E. Vitali, C. Hubig, U. Scholl-wöck, S. R. White, and S. S. C. o. 
t. M.-E. P. Zhang, Absence of superconductivity in the pure two-dimensional Hubbard model, Physical 
Review X 10, 031016 (2020).
[9] V. J. Emery, Theory of high-Tc superconductivity in oxides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2794 (1987).
[10] C. Varma, S. Schmitt-Rink, and E. Abrahams, Charge transfer excitations and superconductivity 
in ionic metals, Solid State Communications 62, 681 (1987).
[11] M. Jurkutat, D. Rybicki, O. P. Sushkov, G. V. M. Williams,
A. Erb, and J. Haase, Distribution of electrons and holes in cuprate superconductors as determined 
from ¹⁷O and ⁶³Cu nuclear magnetic resonance, Phys. Rev. B 90, 140504 (2014).
[12] M. S. Hybertsen, M. Schlüter, and N. E. Christensen, Calcu-lation of Coulomb-interaction 
parameters for La₂CuO₄ using a constrained-density-functional approach, Phys. Rev. B 39, 9028 
(1989).
[13] O. Andersen, A. Liechtenstein, O. Jepsen, and F. Paulsen, LDA energy bands, low-energy 
Hamiltonians, t′, t′′, t (k), and J , Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 56, 1573 (1995), 
proceedings of the Conference on Spectroscopies in Novel Superconductors.
[14] J. Zaanen, G. A. Sawatzky, and J. W. Allen, Band gaps and electronic structure of 
transition-metal compounds, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 418 (1985).
[15] C. Weber, C. Yee, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Scaling of the tran-sition temperature of 
hole-doped cuprate superconductors with the charge-transfer energy, Europhysics Letters 100, 37001 
(2012).
[16] C. Weber, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Strength of correlations in electron- and hole-doped 
cuprates, Nature Physics 6, 574 (2010).
[17] A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Antiferromagnetism and d-wave superconductivity in 
cuprates: A cluster dynam-ical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 62, R9283 (2000).
[18] G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, G. Pálsson, and G. Biroli, Cellular dynamical mean field approach 
to strongly correlated sys-

9


tems, Physical Review Letters 87, 186401 (2001).
[19] T. N. Dionne, A. Foley, M. Rousseau, and D. Sénéchal, Pyqcm: An open-source Python library for 
quantum cluster methods, SciPost Phys. Codebases , 23 (2023).
[20] N. Kowalski, S. S. Dash, P. Sémon, D. Sénéchal, and A.-M. Tremblay, Oxygen hole content, 
charge-transfer gap, cova-lency, and cuprate superconductivity, Proceedings of the Na-tional 
Academy of Sciences 118, e2106476118 (2021).
[21] J. M. Tranquada,  S. M. Heald, and A. R. Mood-enbaugh, X-ray-absorption near-edge-structure 
study of La₂ ₓ (Ba, Srₓ )CuO₄ y superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 36, 5263 (1987).
[22] D. Rybicki, M. Jurkutat, S. Reichardt, C. Kapusta, and
J. Haase, Perspective on the phase diagram of cuprate high-temperature superconductors, Nature 
Communications 7, 11413 (2016).
[23] G. Sordi, G. L. Reaney, N. Kowalski, P. Sémon, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Ambipolar doping of a 
charge-transfer insulator in the Emery model, Physical Review B 111, 045117 (2025).
[24] N. Kowalski, Dopage, température critique et étude du modèle de Hubbard à trois bandes, Ph.D. 
thesis, Université de Sher-brooke (2021).
[25] B. Kyung, D. Sénéchal, and A.-M. S. Tremblay, Pairing dy-namics in strongly correlated 
superconductivity, Physical Re-view B 80, 205109 (2009).
[26] S. S. Dash and D. Sénéchal, Pseudogap transition within the superconducting phase in the 
three-band Hubbard model, Physical Review B 100, 214509 (2019).
[27] B. Bacq-Labreuil, B. Lacasse, A.-M. S. Tremblay, D. Sénéchal, and K. Haule, Towards an ab 
initio theory of high-temperature superconductors:  a study of multilayer
cuprates, arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10019 (2024).
[28] D. Sénéchal and AM. Tremblay, Hot spots and pseudogaps for hole- and electron-doped 
high-temperature superconduc-tors, Physical Review Letters 92, 126401 (2004).
[29] L. Wang, G. He, Z. Yang, M. Garcia-Fernandez, A. Nag,
K. Zhou, M. Minola, M. L. Tacon, B. Keimer, Y. Peng, et al., Paramagnons and high-temperature 
superconductivity in a model family of cuprates, Nature Communications 13, 3163 (2022).
[30] S. M. O’Mahony, W. Ren, W. Chen, Y. X. Chong, X. Liu,
H. Eisaki, S.-i. Uchida, M. Hamidian, and J. S. Davis, On the electron pairing mechanism of 
copper-oxide high tempera-ture superconductivity, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
119, e2207449119 (2022).
[31] W. Ruan, C. Hu, J. Zhao, P. Cai, Y. Peng, C. Ye, R. Yu,
X. Li, Z. Hao, C. Jin, et al., Relationship between the parent charge transfer gap and maximum 
transition temperature in cuprates, Science bulletin 61, 1826 (2016).
[32] A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Antiferromagnetism and d-wave superconductivity in 
cuprates: A cluster dynam-ical mean-field theory, Phys. Rev. B 62, R9283 (2000).
[33] G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, G. Pálsson, and G. Biroli, Cellular Dynamical Mean Field Approach 
to Strongly Correlated Sys-tems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 186401 (2001).
[34] D. Sénéchal, Quantum cluster methods: CPT and CDMFT, in Many-Body Physics: From Kondo to 
Hubbard, Vol. 5, edited by E. Pavarini, E. Koch, and P. Coleman (Forschungszentrum Jülich, 2015) 
pp. 13.1–13.22.
[35] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, A Simplex Method for Function Minimization, The Computer Journal 7, 
308 (1965).
